Greetings, today we want to consider our
discussion of the cardiovascular system, and in particular we want to think about
how the heart adjust its output of blood to match the needs of the body in general. So the many objectives that we
want to consider are to define and calculate the injection
fraction of the heart. Secondly, to discuss what's known
as the Frank-Starling relationship. in terms of venous return, that is
the blood coming back into the heart and its filling, versus cardiac output,
and that is how much blood is actually being ejected from the heart
to enter into the circulatory system. And third we want to explain the effects
of the sympathetic nervous system on cardiac output. Okay, so what do we mean by cardiac
performance or cardiac output? The cardiac output is the volume of
blood that's pumped each minute. And that as you know from
last time when we met, the cardiac output is equal to
stroke volume times heart rate. And that the heart rate is typically
about 72 beats per minute. And our stroke volume
about 70 milliliters, so that the cardia output at rest,
is about 5 liters per minute. But we know that [SOUND], excuse me, individuals such as athletes can
have a much lower heart rate. They can have a very high
parasympathetic tone and by having a high parasympathetic
tone they have lower heart rate, but they still have, at rest, a cardiac
output of five liters per minute, and this means that the heart had
to adjust the stroke volume. So, the stroke volume increases
in a well trained athlete. And so that somebody who has a heart
rate of 50 milliliters per minute, beats per minute, and has a cardiac
output of 5 litters per minute will them have a stroke
volume of 100 milliliters. The other way of thinking about
the heart and its function, is to think about the ejection volume,
or the ejection fraction. This is calculate by the stroke volume
divided by the end diastolic volume, that is by the volume at the end of
diastole when the ventricles are full. So this will give at times 100. This gives us the percentage
of blood that's pumped from the filled ventricle per beat. [COUGH] Excuse me. Typically, when we have a normal heart, you can have an ejection fraction
anywhere from 50 to maybe 70 or 75%. But in a weak heart, where the heart
has gained in size but has not gained in strong, then those hearts will have
an ejection fraction that's much lower. So let's look at what's happening. We can consider this by looking at
our pressure volume loops, and so what we have here on the Y
axis is pressure, and on the X axis is volume, and
volume is increasing in this direction. We have one heart, and that's heart A, and that heart we're going to fill with
more blood as it goes through diastole. So we're going to shift the first
Heart A to Heart B by simply increasing the end diastolic volume, and
that's what's here on the x axis. As we shift the heart, and this is the same heart, all we're doing is
adding more volume to it, as we do that, you'll notice that it started with
a systolic pressure of 100, but now a filled heart, a heart that has
more blood within the ventricle, can generate up to a 100, is now
generating 180 millimeters of mercury. So that by simply filling
the same heart with more blood, we're able to get a better contraction, better force from that particular heart
and we have a higher systolic pressure. So that's an advantage and
that's why the heart will in fact, meet their increased demand by increasing volume within the system,
and that is the filling of the heart. But in this particular case the stroke
volume of the two loops that is A and B, we kept as 40 milliliters. So what if we calculate the ejection
fraction form loop A, that is the heart at rest before we started to fill it
with more blood, then what we find is that 40 divided by 90 will give us
an ejection fraction which is about 44%. But what about the injection
fraction from loop B. It's the same heart but we've added more
volume, more blood to the ventricular and we've maintained the stroke volume at
40 and what we see then is it's 40, divided by 140,
which is its end diastolic volume. And so, now, that heart has only
about 28% ejection fraction. So although it can give us more pressure,
or can generate more pressure, the heart is, in fact,
not as efficient at doing so. Now under normal conditions, [COUGH]
excuse me, under normal conditions when the heart is filling with more volume,
the stroke volume is also increasing and this is due to our
Frank Starling relationship. Remember when we said that the heart is not able to recruit more muscle
fibers such as the skeletal muscle, because as the heart is pumping
it's using all of the fibers. They're all connected
through gap junctions, and they're synchronously pumping. So we can't recruit more
fibers to generate more power. But instead, when we stretch the heart and we stretch the myocytes,
then they will give a better contraction. And this we said was due to the differences in the molecular
arrangements within the fibers themselves. This is known as
the Frank-Starling effect and effectively what it's saying is that the
volume that's coming in to a normal heart is the volume that will be
ejected by that normal heart. So let's consider this particular figure. On the x axis, there is the left
ventricular and diastolic volume, or EDV. And on the y axis is the ejection volume
and as you know, that's the stroke volume. So we have stroke volume then
versus the end diastolic volume. And if we start our heart here at rest and it has an end diastolic volume of 100,
then as we fill this normal heart, we fill it and move it to an End Diastolic
Volume of a 150, notice that we now have moved the stroke volume has increased,
the stroke volume has gotten bigger. So when the heart had an end
diastolic volume of a 100, we have a stroke volume that was about 70. But at 150, that same heart, the end
diastolic volume of 150 milliliters, that same heart will give us a stroke
volume that's now at about 90. So, we can increase the stroke volume by
filling the heart, and this filling of the heart is referred to as venous return,
and it's also referred to as preload. Preload increases the ability
of the heart to eject blood. It's increasing it's contraction and
it's power. It's able to generate more force
by stretching the ventricles. By filling the ventricles and
this is called preload. Okay, so how does the body adjust preload? So there's several mechanisms by
which preload can be increased and that's what's noted here. So the first is what's called
the skeletal muscle pump. As an individual starts to run let's say, they are requiring more blood
to be delivered to the muscles, to deliver more oxygen to
the contracting muscles. The contraction of the muscle
itself is squeezing against the veins that are within that tissue. And as it squeezes against the veins, it Is helping to propel the blood out of
the tissue, and back towards the heart. And so that simply, the local effect, and
it is called the skeletal muscle pump. The second way that we can increase
the return of blood to the heart or increase venous return,
is what's known as the respiratory pump. So again as we're running and
we're taking bigger breaths, then the expansion of the thorax,
as you're taking a larger breath, decreases the pressure
that's around the heart. And that means that the heart can
actually expand easier, and so the blood then can flow
back into the heart faster. So this inspiration,
that is taking in a big breath, like this, will lower the thoracic pressure. Fourth, and I'm gonna skip three, and
we'll come back to it in a second, but fourth, we have what's
called vasoconstriction. So this is, is that the skeletal muscle
that's around the blood vessels on the arterial side, will constrict
when we have a sympathetic drive. These are through the alpha
one andrenergic receptors. As these cells constrict,
they will force the blood then from the arterial side to the venous
side of the circulation. And so this then,
augments the return of blood to the heart. In addition, we have smooth muscle that's
located along the long axis of the veins, and this smooth muscle also can contract
and as it contracts due to the sympathetic drive, then we will again augment
the flow of blood back to the heart. So vasoconstriction or sympathetic
drive will increase venous return or it aids in the filling of the heart. Then what about this number three? This is called an increase in
blood volume due to doping. Doping is a concept where
an individual will take blood or donate blood, takes the blood
from his own circulatory system. Let's say a half a liter,
and he stores it. And then, just before a race, that
blood is given back to the individual. The individual has five liters of
blood within his circulation and he's getting back another half
a liter to the circulation, so he now has onboard five and
a half liter's of blood. This obviously increases
his ability to carry oxygen because there's more red blood
cells within the circulatory system, and it also is increasing the volume
within the circulatory system. So we have more volume then that
can be delivered to the heart. So this aids then in the delivery
of blood to the tissues. It is illegal, and
it is illegal partly because it gives an unfair advantage to these
individuals in an athletic event. But most importantly that
by giving this extra blood back to the individual we're
increasing the viscosity of the blood. You're changing the pressure
within the system. By giving more blood cells to the body, what happens is that as
the individual dehydrates. So they lose fluid as the during the
athletic event through sweating then this individual's blood actually becomes
higher in the hematic increases. It has more blood cells per unit volume. And under those conditions
the viscosity increases and this is actually harder on the heart. So it's more work for the heart to
push through a more viscous blood and can be quite dangerous. And it is illegal. The last system that we're gonna
consider is that the cardiac myocytes themselves are sensitive
to certain chemicals. These chemicals are called ionotropic
agents and an ionotropic agent is an agent that can increase
the contractility of the muscle cells themselves, or
the muscle fibers themselves. And that's what's shown here. So right here we have, again,
our left ventricle end diastolic volume on the x axis, and our ejection volume,
or stroke volume, is on the y axis. Under the resting state where
we have normal Individual and all we've done is increase
the volume to this individual. As we know, by increasing the volume,
we will increase stroke volume. So if we increase end diastolic volume,
deliver, preload to the heart, we increase stroke volume. But let's keep the end diastolic
volume constant at 100. So, we're sitting here and now, we'll give
an ionotropic agent to the individual. And ionotropic agents are things
such as catecholamines. So norepinephrine and
epinephrine are ionotropic agents. If we give a sympathetic discharge, or
norepinephrine, to this individual, what happens is that the heart now at
that exact same end diastolic volume, can give a better squeeze, and
that means that it ejects more blood. So we move the stroke volume
from something like 35 to 70. So we've greatly improved the ability
of the heart then, to eject the blood, and that's by changing the contractility
of the muscle cells themselves. These effects are multiple effects, they're occurring at the level
of the myofibrils themselves and also sarcoplasmic reticulum as well
as within the plasma membrane itself. So the entire cell becomes
more sensitive to calcium. By doing so, we're able to have
a faster off rate, on rate for the calcium and the contractual
event is actually improved. So sympathetic stimulation then is
a way the heart can effect not only venous return as we said it aids in
the constriction of blood vessels and so by doing so we move the blood
back to the heart faster, but it increases the contractility of
the heart itself, the myocyte itself. The contraction of
the myocyte is more forceful. And then lastly, as you know,
it increases heart rate. So cardiac output, which is, cardiac
output equals to stroke value times heart rate, the sympathetic nervous
system not only increases heart rate, but it also can increase stroke volume,
and therefore can increase cardiac output. Okay, so what's our key concepts then? So the general concepts are first,
that the volume of the blood which is ejected with each beat
is called the stroke volume and that the sum of the stroke volumes ejected
in one minute is the cardiac output. Third, that the ejection fraction
is the percentage of blood which is pumped from
the heart in each beat. Fourth, cardiac output increases with
increased filling of the ventricles, and this is referred to as venous return,
and also as preload. And the cardiac output can increase
with an increase in sympathetic stimulation or
by giving an ionotophc agent to the heart. All right so see you next time.