Greetings. So today we want to continue our
discussion of the circulatory system and in particular we wanna talk
about the plumbing, that is, the vessels by which the blood
is flowing through the body. And in its delivery of
oxygen to the tissues and the removal of waste
materials from those tissues. So you all know that the heart
then is the pump for the circulatory system and
that these will be the vessels and that the vessels plus the heart
form a closed system. So our learning objectives will be to
describe the function of the arteries, the arterioles, capillaries,
venules and veins. These are the various vessels through
which the blood will be flowing. And secondly, we wanna describe the
relationship between pressure, flow, and resistance in regulating the distribution
of the blood throughout the body. Third, we want to define the systolic,
diastolic, and mean arterial Arterial pressures. And you've already heard about systolic
pressure and diastolic pressure, which is simply, systolic is the pressure generated
by the heart when it's ejecting blood, and diastolic pressure is the pressure
that's within the vessels as all the valves are closed and no blood is then leaving the heart and
entering into the arterial system. And then fourth, we wanna explain what's
known as the myogenic response, active and reactive hyperemia, and then reflex
control of the blood vessel's resistance. And then five, talk about the factors
that will affect the trans-capillary movement of fluids and solutes. This is the way we
deliver these fluids and solutes into the tissues, and
it is by local diffusion. And then six, we wanna explain
the differences between capacitance and distributing vessels and the relationship between the blood
circulation and the lymphatic circulation. So we have a very large list of materials
to cover, so let's get started. So the first here is to consider
the actual circulatory system. And as I said, we have a heart,
and the heart is, essentially, composed of two
separate hearts that are in series. The first delivers then, is the right the right ventricle
delivers blood to the lungs for oxygenation and then oxygenated blood
is returned to the left ventricle and the left ventricle then distributes
the blood to the rest of the body. As the blood is ejected
from the left ventricle it enters into a series of vessels
which are called arteries and these vessels at the very beginning,
the largest is the aorta. The aorta is what's
called an elastic artery. This is an artery that has a lot of
elastic tissue within its walls so it's able to stretch and
then contract readily. These elastic arteries drain into
what are called muscular arteries, and the muscular artery is simply an
artery that has more muscle in its wall, then elastic and these muscular arteries are the arteries which will
deliver the blood to specific organs. And the delivery of the blood
to the specific organs is going to be in parallel. So when we deliver blood to the kidney,
it's independent of delivery of the blood for instance
to the the GI tract or to the lung. Once the blood is delivered
to the specific organ, then it enters into the organ. And within the organ
the distribution within the organ will be governed by what
are called arterioles. The arterials are sort of the little
spigots within the system. And they are the ones that determine which
portions of the organ will be profused. From the arteries,
the blood drains into the capillaries. And this is the site where we have
exchange of solutes and fluids, such as water, between the tissue and
the bloodstream, itself. And then draining from the capillaries
are the smallest of the veins, the venous system which
is called the venules. These drain into veins, and
the veins eventually return to the heart, return the blood to the heart
through the vena cavas. The veins have the largest
capacity within the system so the most amount of blood is actually
sitting in the veins at any one time. Something about 60 to 70% of the total
blood that's within the system was on the vein side. In addition to that, the veins
are a low-pressure system, and so the veins have valves where the blood
is able to move through this system In a unidirectional manner, but
cannot move in the opposite direction, cuz the valves prevent back
flow through the system. So the veins have large capacity and
low pressure. This is in contrast to the aorta and
the elastic arteries and the muscular arteries where
this is a high pressure system. So in this particular side then
the pressure that's being generated by the heart is delivered into the aorta and
then from the aorta into the arteries and this will have a high
pressure system on that side. Okay, so what are the rules for
the cardio vascular system? So the first rule is that
the flow is going to, of blood, is going to be unidirectional
through the system. And that the flow is generated by pressure
gradient, which is generated by the heart. And flow will go from high
to low pressure states. The second is that the resistance
will oppose flow as the blood is moving through the vessels. There's a certain resistance
to the blood flow and this is due to the blood cells bumping
up against the walls, the fluid bumping up against the walls, and the blood cells
themselves bumping up against each other. So there's a type of
resistance within the system. But the resistance is also dependent
on the length of the tubes which in the human, is essentially
fixed once you reach the adult state. Secondly, on the radius of the tube, and
this is actually the most important. This is the control site. So if you change the radius of the tube, you can increase resistance within
the tube, if you make the radius smaller. So smaller diameter vessel
has a higher resistance. [COUGHING] Excuse me. And we'll come back to that point later. And then the viscosity of the blood, and as you know if you do blood doping you
can increase the viscosity of the blood. If you have dehydration
then the loss of volume from the vasculature can increase
the viscosity of the blood. But these are unusual circumstances,
and under normal circumstances, the viscosity of the blood
is not a factor. The third thing that we have
to think about is flow rate. And that is simply the volume of the blood
that passes through a given point per unit time. And this is liters per minute. And this will be determined
by the pressure gradients and by the resistance within an area. And last,
we have the velocity of the blood, and this is how far the volume of
blood travels per unit of time. This is in millimeters per second. And this is determined predominantly
by cross sectional area. The slowest flow,
the slowest of velocity or speed of flow through the system
will be found in the capillaries. The capillaries are very small diameter
vessels, but there are many, many, many capillaries. And so the total cross sectional area
Of the capillaries is quite large. And so the flow then will be very
slow across the capillaries. And this will be important
because we need to have time for exchange of the solutes and fluids
across the capillaries with the tissues. And this, of course, is by diffusion. So we need some time for
the diffusion to occur so that we slow flow then
through the capillaries. Okay, so let's look at the pressure
gradients through the entire system and we'll only consider
the pressure gradients through the circulatory system that's
delivering blood to the body. We have the blood when it is ejected
it has a systolic pressure and the systolic pressure is usually 120, or we'll consider it to be 120
millimeters of mercury. And that diastolic pressure will be 80,
and so when the blood is ejected,
then we have a high pressure, but then as blood is not being ejected from
the heart, the blood that's entering the pressure, then will drop and
it drops within the aorta. So we see then a pulsatility of the blood
as it's going into the aorta and that's between the systolic pressure and
the diastolic pressure. That pulsatility is maintained
through the aorta and in through the elastic arteries and
into the muscular arteries. This pulsatilty is
actually quite important. So what happens is that in the elastic
arteries, as the blood is being delivered to them, we have a systole,
we have a high pressure. Then, the walls of the arteries
are stretched because there's a lot of volume that's being
delivered to the vessel. Then, the stretching of these walls during
diastole maintains the pressure gradient within the vessel because as there's
no blood being needed from the heart then the blood that's within the elastic
artery, the elastic artery recoil then, is pressing against the fluid and
maintaining that pressure gradient. This ability of the elastic
artery to stretch to volume, it changes volume with a change in
pressure, is called compliance. And so compliance then, is equal to a change in volume
over a change in pressure. So the elastic arteries
then have a compliance, which allows them to maintain
the pressure gradient. As the blood then flows from the elastic
arteries into the muscular arteries, and we begin to distribute it
to the different organs. Then, the resistance within
the system starts to cause a drop within the pressure, but the dominant
area where the pressure drop occurs, it occurs within the arterioles. So the pressure then will fall
dramatically within the arterioles and at that time, the pulsatility will also be diminished
as it's moving through the arterioles. So the arterioles then are our spigots,
so the arterioles are the dominant way that the blood will be
distributed within the organs and that this distribution causes
an increase in resistance to flow. And so we have a pressure drop, a dramatic
pressure drop, across the arterioles. Then from the arterioles, the blood
will enter in to the capillaries. And again, there's a pressure
drop across the capillaries, but it's less than what we see
through the arterioles. And the pulsatility then,
of the blood is essentially smooth, as once we get in to the veins and
in to the vena cava, which is the largest. Of the veins that is delivering
the blood back to the heart. Then the blood that
flowed now is smooth and we have a very low pressure
within the system. So there's two things to remember,
one is that we have pulsatility of blood flow on the arterial side and that
secondly that the blood pressure is going to diminish as it runs through the entire
circuit and returns to the heart itself. And it's pretty easy to remember
the idea about the pulsatility and that is simply that if
you cut your wrist and the blood is spurting out from your wrist
you know that you've cut the artery. But if you cut the wrist and the blood is just oozing out then
you know that you have cut the vein. Okay, so what about these blood pressures? So, the blood pressure, then, we're gonna
refer to as the mean arterial pressure. And the main arterial pressure is
calculated by the diastolic pressure plus one-half of the systolic, one-third times the systolic pressure,
minus the diastolic pressure. And the systolic pressure minus
the diastolic pressure is referred to as the pulse pressure. So, why is that the mean arterial pressure
is not simply taking the systolic pressure, plus the diastolic pressure and
dividing by two. Well the reason for that is the equation
is weighted for the diastolic pressure and that's simply that the heart stays in
diastole longer than it is in systole, and so the amount of time, the pressure,
the diastolic pressure then, has a larger component to calculation
of the mean arterial pressure Okay, so now, once we have the blood
is gonna be distributed to the various organs, I told you that
the distribution will occur through a parallel system so that I can
distribute blood to the GI tract and not be distributing blood
to the skeletal muscles. But why is it that we have to have this
movement of blood from organ system to another organ system depending on demand? And that's simply because there's not
enough blood within the circulatory system to allow us to perfuse
all of the capillary beds within the body at one time. If all of the capillary beds were dilated,
so that they were all open, so you were able to perfuse every capillary
in the body, then you would pass out. So in order then to distribute
the blood to specific organs that need the blood for
that particular state, then we have these distributing
vessels which are called the arteries. So the flow as it's going
through this system will be dependent on the pressure gradient divided
by the resistance within the system. So for the entire cardiovascular system
the mean arterial pressure minus the pressure in the vena
cava divided by the total peripheral resistance is
what we will consider. So that's if we are talking about
the entire system but within the organ itself It would be the pressure that's
within the mean arterial pressure minus the venous pressure of that organ
divided by the resistance of that organ. And in both the case of
the entire systemic circulation, as well as in the case of the organ,
the venous pressure is very low compared to the mean arterial pressure and so
it's considered to be essentially a zero. The vena-cava has a pressure of about
12 where the mean arterial pressure will be something like a hundred. So, we really don't factor it in, and sort-of make the adjustment
that the cardiac output, then, is equal to mean arterial pressure divided
by the total peripheral resistance. Or the perfusion pressure for
the organ is equal to mean arterial pressure divided by
the resistance in the organ. Now once we're within the organs, then specific capillary beds will
be perfused within the organs. Oh, one other point that I should make,
and that is, is that, although the arteries are regulating which
blood flow goes to particular tissues at any one time, for instance,
in the fed state, the GI tract is getting a large
amount of the blood flow, but the skeletal muscle may be only
getting 20% of the cardiac output. The two organ systems that always
get a 100% of their needs and that is the heart and the brain. So the heart and the brain, regardless of
the state, whether it's a fed state and we're diverting blood to the GI tract. Or it's a state of exercise
where we are diverting blood predominantly to the skeletal muscle and
not so much to the GI tract. The heart and
the brain get 100% profusion. Okay, so let's talk about arterioles. Arterioles then regulate the blood
flow within the organs, so in the arterioles have a complicated
set of control systems. The first is that the arterioles are going
to be governed by local conditions, and there are essentially three
types of local conditions. So the first is the Myogenic response,
and this is simply that if there's more volume, more pressure that's being
delivered to the arterioles, then the arteriole walls, the smooth muscle
that's within their walls, will stretch. And when they stretch, that'll cause a
contraction cuz you're opening the stretch activated calcium channels and then these
smooth muscle cells will contract and restore the original diameter to the
vessel, or perhaps even make it smaller. So this will be a change
in wall tension and that change in wall tension maintains the
flow rate or pressure within that system. So that is a simple Myogenic response. The second is called Hyperemia. And this is when there is a change
in the interstitial space, that's the components within that interstitial
space, outside of a given tissue. So for instance, if we're exercising and our skeletal muscle is using up a lot of
oxygen, and it's generating a lot of CO2. CO2 levels,
within in the interstitial space, outside of the skeletal muscle, will rise. In addition,
you can have an increase in protons within that area or
potassium within that area. And this increase in these
metabolites cause an active Hyperemia, where the local
arteriole will dilate. So this causes the smooth muscle then to
relax in the walls of those arterioles, and more blood is fed into
those very active sites. This effectively washes away the
by-products, those metabolites that were generated by contraction, or
by the activity of the skeletal muscle. So this is called active Hyperemia,
cuz the muscle is actively working and it is generating these metabolites. There is a second type of Hyperemia where
again we will have an opening of the, we have relaxation of the smooth muscle
of the arteriole and an opening of those vessels and allowing more profusion
of the capillary beds in that region. And this is due now,
not to an active exercise state, but in fact to a loss of
profusion within that area. So if for some reason there's ischemia
within a specific region of the organ, then metabolites will
accumulate within that area. So the metabolism of
the cells is continuing. They're using up oxygen, but new oxygen
is not being delivered to the cells. And local levels of CO2 will rise. When you open the profusion to that
region after the ischemic event, then you have a greater flow of
blood through the region, and that's due to this reactive Hyperemia. So when does this occur? So, you all know, if If you go into the
doctors office and they're gonna take your blood pressure, they put a blood
pressure cuff on your arm, and then increased the pressure
outside of the arteries that's perfusing the, this is the bronchial
artery that's perfusing your forearm. They will collapse the brachial artery,
and when they do so, then the blood flow to the forearm is stopped, and you now
have an ischemic state for the forearm. Then, as he slowly release
the pressure of the cuff. So as they're releasing
the pressure on the cuff, blood flow will resume within the forearm. And at that point, all of these arterioles
and the arteries in this area will dilate and allow more blood
profusion to occur transiently. And this is washing out local
metabolites that had increased during the ischemic state. Now the arteries and arterioles can also
be regulated through reflex control, and in particular we are talking
about arterioles. The reflex control in the first
is the sympathetic innervation, and sympathetic innervation
norepinephrine is the neurotransmitter. It will work on the alpha one
adrenergic receptors which are present on the smooth muscle of these arterioles. Secondly, we can have hormones which will
act in this area, and the hormones then can be either constrictors or dilators. So the hormones can cause the smooth
muscle to either relax if it's dilation or to contract if it's constrictors. And in the case of vasopressin or antidiuretic hormone,
this is a constrictor and epinephrine is again a constrictor it acts
on the alpha one adrenergic receptors. Now there are some cases
where epinephrine can act on the beta 2 receptors and in that case, the beta 2 receptors, for instance, on the
bronchi, the smooth muscle, the bronchi, the epinephrine will cause a dilation or
a relaxation of those smooth muscles, a dilation of the bronchi, and the tubes,
the airways will increase in diameter. So depending upon on the type of receptor
that the epinephrine is acting upon, you can either have constriction, which
would be an alpha-1-adrenergic receptor, which is on the blood vessels, or
the beta-2-adrenergic receptors, which are found on the smooth
muscle of the bronchi. [COUGH]
Okay so these arterioles then are acting as
nozzles within our vasculature and the dynamic change within
their contracted state, that is going from their basal tonal
state, to either contractive or relaxed, changes the diameter
of the arteriole itself. And so the blood flow through
that vessel will be affected. It not only affects the blood
flow through the arteriole but it affects the blood flow in
the capillary bed which is downstream, immediately downstream by that arteriole
and that's what's diagrammed here. So on the y axis we have pressure and
pressure's increasing in this direction. And along the x axis we've diagrammed
artery, arteriole and the capillary. And what's shown is
the change in the arteriole. So if we start with looking here at this,
at the blue, or the basal state. This is our basal tone for the smooth
muscle in the walls of the arterial. We see that we have a drop in pressure as
the blood is flowing across the arterial. And this drop in pressure
is due to the resistance. It's a small, narrow tube, and so, it has high resistance as the blood
is flowing through the tube. If we cause a relaxation in the smooth
muscle that's of the walls of the arterials then the blood flow
within that state then increases. And that means the down stream in the
capillary the pressure now is increased. There's more flow delivered
to the capillary, and so there's more pressure now,
a higher pressure within the capillary. And conversely, if we constrict
the arteriole, and close the lumen of the arteriole further, then
the pressure falls within the capillary. There's less flow delivered to
the capillary bed, and so less flow, less pressure within the capillary bed,
immediately downstream to the capillary. One of the ways that you can think about
this system is that the arteriole is the nozzle that's on your hose and
that if you open the nozzle completely, or close the nozzle,
it changes the flow rate to the tube, the actual hose,
that's attached to your nozzle. And that hose that's attached to to it,
would be the capillaries. And, if you think of
the capillaries as a soaker hose, which they're full of the little holes, then you'll understand that as the flow
goes through the capillary that the flow rate then is slowed as it goes
through the capillary and that there's much interaction between the fluid
within the capillary and the outside. So there's essential no barrier
between the movement of the fluid and the garden itself. All right, so the pressure
gradients that are found within the capillaries are actually very
important for delivery of solus and fluids to the tissues that that
capillary bed is profusion and that's what's diagramed here and we have effectively two pressures
that we need to consider. So the first pressure is simply
the hydrostatic pressure. So this is the main arteriole pressure
that's coming into the organ, so it's hydrostatic pressure coming into the
arteriole, and the hydrostatic pressure, as it goes across the,
across the capillary it falls. Such that the pressure
that exits the capillary is less than the pressure that
entered at the arterial side. And that's due to the resistance within
the flow of the capillary vessel itself. So that's our hydrostatic pressure and the
second pressure is that which is generated by the oncotic pressure which is generated
by the proteins which are within blood and they're attracting water or
keeping water within the system. So the oncotic pressure as it moves
through this region the oncotic pressure is essentially stable. So we have hydrostatic pressure and
oncotic pressure. And on the arterial side of the capillary,
as you see, the hydrostatic pressure is
greater than the oncotic pressure. And when the hydrostatic pressure is
greater than the oncotic pressure, then there is a net filtration, that is
a net movement of fluid from the capillary itself across the capillary walls and
into the interstitial space. And this occurs in most
regions of the body. There's a few exceptions where
you have sealed capillaries, but under most conditions then there's an easy
movement of materials from the capillary, across the endophilia cells,
and into the interstition. On the opposite side,
on the side towards the venules. Now we have the hydrostatic pressure
is less than the oncotic pressure, and under these conditions then fluid is
attracted back into the capillary and that's due to the proteins which
are present within the blood and this is predominantly albumin. So under these conditions
we have reabsorption. So, reabsorption then
occurs when the oncotic pressure is greater than
the hydrostatic pressure. And this is under normal conditions. So, what happens under a condition
where we have very high pressures within the system? So, let's say we have
hypertension within the system. And now, instead of having
a blood pressure of 120 over 80, we may have a blood pressure
that's 180 over 90. Under these conditions, so hypertension,
under hypertension, the hydrostatic pressure, as it's going across
the capillary, stays relatively high. And the oncotic pressure Is
the same as it was before. But if you notice now,
all the way across the capillary, from the arteriole side
to the venule side, we have a hydrostatic pressure which
is greater than the oncotic pressure. So under these conditions
we will get filtration, and you get filtration across the entire
capillary, including on the venule side. And there's no movement of fluid back into
the capillary toward the venule side, so there's a net movement of fluid
out into the interstitium or out into the tissues, and
under this condition, we then have a pooling of fluid outside of
the vasculature, and this is called edema. So the pressure gradients across
the capillaries determine whether or not we have a net filtration,
a net reabsorption, or whether we have only filtration
across the entire capillary. And we can also have a condition
where we have hypertension, and under hypotension then
we'll get the opposite. And under hypotension we
can have a situation where All the way along in our capillary. The tension that's generated, the hyperstatic pressure that's generated,
is very low. So if we have a very low
hydrostatic pressure, so we have a hypotensive situation
then the hydrostatic pressure starts very low and
drops across the capillary. But under these conditions, the ancotic
pressure now can be in fact, higher, and as the oncotic pressure is greater
than the hydrostatic pressure, then there's reabsorption of
fluid back into the capillary, all the way along the capillary bed. So the pressures then, that are feeding
the capillary bed, are important for the delivery of oxygen, nutrients,
and so forth to the tissues. And then, in addition, they are very
important to the removal of fluids. Once we've delivered the materials
to the tissues then the fluid needs to be reabsorbed and
reenter into the circulatory system. What about this extra fluid? Sometimes there's
a mismatch in this fluid. So the fluid is leaving
at the arterial end But not all of it is taken back
up into the venial end. And there's a little bit of extra fluid
then that stays out into the tissues. This fluid is picked up by another
circulatory system which is called the lymphatic system and
that's what's diagramed here. The lymphatic system is a system that
starts as a blind ended capillary in the tissues themselves and then drains the
fluid from the tissues, this extra fluid, this lymph from the tissues, and
returns it to the blood stream. It returns it on the venial side
near the vena cava back into the circulatory system. On route, it will go through one filter,
and these filters are called, or more, and
these filters are called lymph nodes. On a given day, you could have as much as
three liters of lymph return to the blood. So this is actually a fairly significant
amount of fluid that needs to be returned from the tissues,
back into the circulatory system. The lymphatic drainage is found in
almost all parts of the body, but it is not present in the CNS. And disruption to this lymphatic
system can have profound effects on edema within the tissue. So for instance, in individuals who have
breast cancer, often these nodes, these lymph nodes, are removed from the, the
draining lymph nodes are removed, which are underneath the in the armpit, which
is near the breast that was affected. And these nodes are tested
to see whether or not there's metastasis of cells
that has occurred, whether or not there's cancer cells within these
little filtering units or nodes. When they strip these nodes, and also
possibly nodes that are further within the system, and disrupt the vessels,
then fluid is no longer able to be drained away through the lymphatic system
and back into the circulatory system. And so fluid can build up
within the lymphatic drainage. And then to get the fluid
back into the body, then an individual has to massage
the arms or exercise the arm to help move the fluid back through these vessels
and back into the circulatory system. All right, what's our general concepts? So the general concept then, the first is
that the heart consists of two pumps and that drive the unidirectional flow
of blood through the pulmonary and the systemic circulations. Secondly, that this vascular
system is a conduit for the blood flow and it's a dynamic
system because it can control the distribution of the blood from
one area of the body to another. And that the distribution to
the organs is in parallel so that if I shut off
the distribution to one arm, it does not affect the flow
that's going into the other arm. So, this arm is not in
series with this arm. So, these arms are being
perfused in parallel. So I can affect the distribution
of blood here, and not be defecting the distribution
of blood over here. Thirdly, the arteries are low resistance
conduits that maintain the pressure, in particular the aorta and
the elastic arteries. They maintain the pressure, then drain
diastole when there's no flow of blood coming from the heart, and allow this
pressure gradient to be maintained so that we can have distribution
of blood to the organs. Fourth, the arterioles are dominant site
of resistance within the system and that they determine what is the region within
the organ that will have, be perfused. Five, capillaries
are the site of exchange and it's the balance between the hydrostatic
and oncotic forces that determine the direction of food movement,
either into or out of the capillaries. So when we have a higher pressure then, or hydrostatic pressure is greater than
oncotic pressure, there's a filtration and there's a net movement of fluid from the
lumen of the capillary into the tissue. But if the oncotic pressure is
greater than the hydrostatic pressure that's present within the tissue, then the fluid will move from
the tissue back into the blood stream. And six,
veins are low resistance conduits for venous return, and
they are volume reservoirs. That is they have a very large capacity. So about 60% to 70% of the blood
within the system at any time resides on the venule side, or
on the vein side, venous side. Six, the sympathetic nervous system
constricts the smooth muscle of the vein and can increase the venous return and
thereby increase stroke volume and cardiac output, and
we know that is called the preload. So we can increase preload by
affecting the venous return. Seven, the lymphatic system
provides a one-way route for the return of interstitial fluid
to the cardiovascular system. And this interstitial
fluid is called lymph, and it is the sort of little mismatch
between what's being filtered across the capillary and what's being
reabsorbed back in to the capillary. And eight, disease states
that alter the hydrostatic or oncotic pressure can result in edema. So if we have hypertension
they can generate edema by having the hydrostatic pressure high all
the way across the capillary, and so we're filtering all the way
across the capillary. There are other states where the oncotic
pressure can be reduced within the system, such as when,
if you have a problem with the liver. Say you have cirrhosis of the liver and
under these conditions then the liver is not able to make sufficient
quantities of albumin. So the oncotic pressure
within the blood is less. And that means that the attraction
of water back into the bloodstream is less on the venule side. And so
we will have a higher hydrostatic pressure than oncotic pressure all the way across
the capillary and again edema will form. You can have problems than during heart
failure where the hydrostatic pressure Is changed. Liver disease, as I've just described,
where the oncotic pressure is changed, or in kidney diseases where we
are holding too much water or we're not able to urinate and so
there's a large volume within the system. High pressures within the system,
or we have protein malnutrition, where, again,
the oncotic pressures can be diminished. So this system then, is a balance
between the hydrostatic pressure and the oncotic pressure. And fluids will be distributed accordingly
as to which pressures are the highest across the capillaries within the tissues. Okay, so see you next time when we'll
talk about how this entire system is a gigantic reflex loop and
how the reflex loop is controlled. See you then.