Welcome, so today we wanna continue our
discussion of the Endocrine systems. The general concepts of
the Endocrine systems. And today we wanna talk about
two specific things that is the assessment of the system and
its pathology. The way you classify the pathology. So first we wanna explain
then the principles and the limitations of how
we measure the hormones. And this is done in two ways. One is by actually quantitating them and
secondly asking whether or not they're active. And then secondly we wanna
to explain classification of these endocrine pathologies. So assessment of functions. So as we said the last time we were in
here, that if we have too much hormone. That we have a hyper
secretion of the hormone. We have hormone excess. And the problem with the situation
is that you can have down regulation of the target cell receptor. So we could desensitize the system. So that it's not recognizing and that it's
not giving us the biological activity. Or we could have a really
really strong response. And so we have an over response to the
amount of hormone that's being available. The second was that we have too
little concentration of the hormone, we have hypo secretion of the hormone. And this would be hormone insufficiency, where not enough of the receptors
on the target cells are occupied. And we don't get the biological
effect that we need, or the biological response that we need. And then we said we could also
have target cell resistance. And this is a problem where the receptors
on the target cells are unresponsive. And they could be unresponsive
because they're uncoupled. So they're still present
on the cell surface. This is what we see with
Diabetes Type 2 Individuals often. Or we have the receptors
actually removed or degraded. So it's not even present
on the cell surface. And then just right is a normal or
eu-secretion. And that's where the hormone,
the endocrine system is working correctly. So we have two assays for
measuring our hormones. And one of them is called
competitive binding assay. And remember that the hormones are a very, very small concentrations
within the blood. So we have to have a very sensitive
assay to find the amount of hormone, that's within our sample. And to do this we use a specific antibody. So this antibody then
recognizes the hormone. And we have in our system, in the assay,
we put in a labelled hormone. So we have a known amount
of labelled hormone that would bind up all of the antibody
that's within the system. We mix this with a hormone that's
from our patient or from the unknown. We don't know the amount of hormone
that's here, so this is our x amount. We mix this then with the known or
labeled hormone and our antibody. And then assay for how much of the labeled
hormone has been brought down. And the unlabeled hormones should compete
a finite amount of the labeled hormone. And then by subtraction we know
how much should have come down. By subtraction we can figure out how
much of the unlabeled hormone we have present in the sample. So this is high sensitivity
because of the antibody and is high specificity
because of the antibody. But it doesn't tell you
if the hormone is active. So when could this give
us a false reading? So let's say you have an individual who
presents as if they are a diabetic type I. These individuals have very high
circulating levels of plasma glucose. Yes, high circulating of plasma glucose,
but when you assay for the insulin in their bloodstream. You find that insulin is also present. So by this competitive binding assay,
the insulin is present. So the question is,
is the insulin they're making functional? So the way you test that, would be that you give this individual
some insulin that you know is functional. And see whether or not the amount of glucose that;s
circulating in the plasma, will decrease. If it does, then you know that the insulin
that the individual is making, is making an insulin that's not reactive. It can not bind to the receptor, or
it has some problem in its structure. So we have to have a second assay
then which tells us whether or not our hormone is functional. These are called bioassays. So what I've diagrammed here is a complex negative feedback loop
of one of the hormones. That we'll talk about
later on in the course. But this particular hormone is cortisol
and it's secreted by the adrenal gland. This hormone is secreted in
response to low plasma glucose. So we have low plasma glucose,
then the hypothalamus. Which is an area of your brain,
will secrete a hormone called CRH, or corticotropin. This hormone binds to a second area of
the brain called the anterior pituitary to secrete ACTH, adrenal cortocotrophine. This hormone works on the adrenal
cortex to cause secretion of cortisol. So that's our regular stimulation of
the cortisol from the adrenal gland. Cortisol happens to be
a steroid hormone so it takes about 30 to 60 minutes before
cortisol will rise in the blood. And the reason for
the delay is that cortisol is a steroid derivative so
it has to be synthesized on demand. And then cortisol is secreted into
the blood and binds to a carrier and then is delivered to its target tissue. The cortisol will feed
back in a negative manner. To turn off the secretion from the
anterior pituitary and the hypothalamus. This is a complex negative feedback loop. That we saw when we were talking about
homeostatic controls in the first lecture. So what happens if the cortisol that's in
particular individual is very very high. So we have very high level of cortisol,
and because we have high level of cortisol. We will actually have very
high levels of plasma glucose. And the individual is coming
in to the physician's office. Because of the symptoms that this very
high cortisol is causing within his body. So, this high cortisol should have
fed back and turned off ACTH and turned off CRH. But it doesn't seem to be, it's too high. So the question is do we have a tumor
that's making this cortisol, or do we have too much of this ACTH. Which is pushing the synthesis
of this cortisol. So is the problem occurring here,
at the ACTH level, or is the problem occurring here at
the cortisol level, at the adrenal itself. So to test this axis then,
we run a suppression test. And this is,
that we give a drug called dexamethasone, which inhibits the synthesis
of ACTH by pituitary cells. When we give this drug, if we administer
the drug, the ACTH levels should fall. And when the ACTH level should fall,
then the cortisol levels should also fall. So, if we had a very high amount of ACTH,
then we've turned off the ACTH, the cortisol should fall. If the cortisol does not
fall under these conditions. Then the question is whether or
not the ACTH has gone down, and you can then assay for the ACTH. If on the other hand,
the cortisol does fall and the ACTH, let's say the ACTH under
those circumstances did fall. But that the cortisol stayed high, that would tell you that there's
a problem with the adrenal glands. Or that there's a problem with
a tumor someplace in the body that's secreting cortisol. That's not under the regulation of ACTH. So this is a way then
that we can sort of parse the axis to find out exactly where
in the axis our problem lies. Let's look at a case where
we have the opposite. Where we have low cortisol,
we have low cortisol levels. The hypothalamus secretes CRH
due to the low plasma glucose. And we should have a CTH,
but we have low cortisol. We can give this individual ACTH,
so exogenose ACTH to push the axis. To see whether or
not the adrenal is working. And when we do that then
the cortisol levels should rise. We wait 30 to 60 minutes and
we should see rise in cortisol. If the gland,
the adrenal gland is working correctly, then the exogenous ACTH should
correct this situation. We should see a rise in cortisol. That then tells us that there was
a problem with the anterior pituitary, that it was not secreting ACTH correctly. Or there may have been
a problem with the CRH, which is then there's
a decrease in the ACTH. So at that level then,
you would have to go back and look to see whether ACTH and
CRH levels are appropriate. So how do you classify these
endocrine pathologies? So the endocrine pathologies then in this
situation where we have this complex negative feedback loop. We have a primary pathology if the last
endocrine organ is not working correctly. So in our case we had low cortisol. And that endocrine organ
was the adrenal cortex. If we have low cortisol, what we should
have seen if the problem is sitting here. Then what we should have seen is
that ACTH levels would be high and CRH levels would be high. That the system would be trying to push
to get an increase in the cortisol. On the other hand and we don't have a negative feedback
loop to decrease the ACTH or the CRH. Because the cortisol level is low. If the problem was secondary then
we'd have a low cortisol but we would also have a low ACTH. The ACTH is the problem, and that means that the problem is
sitting here at the pituitary. The CRH then could be high because
the CRH is trying to push the ACTH. But the ACTH is not being
secreted correctly, it's low and therefore cortisol is low. That would be classified
as a secondary pathology. And if the problem is occurring at
the level of the hypothalamus then this is a tertiary problem. Where we have low cortisol, we will
have low ACTH, we will have low CRH. The entire axis is down-regulated. And the entire axis is down-regulated,
we are missing CRH. In these individuals then
the individual can be given ACTH. By giving them ACTH we then can
move the cortisol levels up. Because the adrenal gland
was working correctly. So these pathologies then as you're
looking through these different problems. And we wanna see whether not,
what these different pathologies are. And to be able to classify at what
level the pathology is occurring. This is a misspelling. So one of our general concepts,
then, first of all we have, pathology and endocrinology. Occurs when there is either too little or
too much hormone. Or we have a resistance to the hormone
due to a receptor dysfunction. And secondly,
we can interpret the hormone levels. And as we're interpreting
the hormone levels, we have to consider the trophic
hormones that are above it. And or the level of the nutrients
which are controlled by the hormone. And so in the case of the complex
negative feedback loop. We have to consider all of the hormones. Which are within that negative
feedback loop as to whether or not they may be the problem. And you start with the primary and
then work backwards. But you have assays where
you can assay the amount. For instance,
we could assay the amount of ACTH. We can assay the amount of cortisol. But you start with assaying
the amount of cortisol. And then go back and see whether or
not there was a problem with the ACTH. So I hope this makes sense to everybody. You should go ahead and
try the problem sets. Because this will allow you to apply what you've learned from these
various concepts in endocrinology. Two actual cases and see whether or
not you can think through these cases. Okay, so see you next time. Bye bye.