So welcome back. So today we want to talk
about the endocrine system. And we only wanna talk about it in
general concepts or general terms. And then when we actually go through
the endocrine system a little later in the course, we're gonna look at
very specific endocrine glands. But today we're gonna
look over the entire, sort of an overview of the entire system. So the first things we wanna talk about is to contrast the endocrine
reflex loop with local control. And then secondly,
we want to characterize hormonal classes. And this is gonna be classified
according to their chemical nature. Third, we wanna explain the role
of the carrier proteins in the cases where we have
a hydrophobic molecule and it has to be delivered through the blood
through an aqueous system to the tissues. Four, we wanna explain the differences
among the receptor types for the different classes of these hormones. And then we wanna explain
the differences in their stimuli. And then lastly,
explain differences in their regulation. Okay, so there's quite a bit of
things to go over, so let's start. So the first thing is that this
is one of the major homeostatic control systems of the body. The other one, of course,
is the nervous system. But you have also local control systems. And the local controls systems are
occurring at the target cells themselves. And target cells are the cells
that have receptors, that is, a protein that can recognize
a specific chemical. And we said in the homeostasis lectures
that we have a situation where a chemical can be secreted
from the first cell and it works on its neighboring cell, and
that chemical is called a paracrine. But we can also have the cell secreting
a chemical that works on itself, and that's then called an autocrine. But these are not
considered to be hormones. They are secreted into the interstitial
space, and they work locally. The homeostatic controls that we're
talking about when we're talking about the endocrine system is that we
have a cell that's going to secrete it's chemical into the blood. And then the blood is going to
deliver it to the target cells. Those are the cells that have receptors
for the hormone or for that chemical. All of the cells of the body will
be bathed by these hormones. They're all gonna see the hormone. But unless they have a receptor for
the hormone, they can't recognize the hormone and
will not respond to the hormone. The second thing that we have to
remember about this system is that these chemicals are being
secreted into the blood. And the blood is effectively three and
a half liters of plasma, so you have three and half liters of fluid. And the chemical then is going to be
diluted into this very large volume. Because of that, the chemicals will be
at very, very, very low concentrations. And because they're at low concentrations,
picomolar or nanomolar range concentrations,
they have to have very, very high affinity receptors
sitting on their cell surfaces. So the target cell has
a high affinity receptor. And the chemical,
the hormone in the blood, the concentration of the hormone is
going to be very low or very dilute. So we have very low concentration or
very dilute signals. This is in contrast to the nervous system, which is our other major
communication system of the body. In here, the nerve is going to secrete
its chemical into a very tiny space, which is called the synapse. And that's almost butting
up against its target cell. So it's a very, very small space. And so the amount of neurotransmitter
being released will be in very high concentration at the target
cell's receptors. So the target cell receptors
then will have low affinity. They have low affinity. It means that the binding of
neurotransmitter to that receptor is very rapid, but it'll come off very
quickly from that receptor. So we have in the nervous system then, we have a high concentration
of the neurotransmitter. And the receptor on the target cell is
going to have a low affinity receptor. The other thing we need to remember
about the endocrine system is that these are ductless glands. So the secretions from these
hormones is going to go straight into the capillary beds that
are profusing all of these cells. There are no ducts that are taking the
material, then, away from the gland and depositing it at a distance. The second thing is that the endocrine
glands are going to regulate many of the homeostatic
missions of the body. So they're going to regulate the sodium
and water balance, the calcium balance, energy balance, processes that
cope with stress, growth and development, and processes that
are associated with reproduction. And as we go through the course, we're
going to talk about each of the endocrine systems that are, in fact, mediating each
of these different homeostatic functions. That other thing about the endocrine
system is that the concentration of the hormone is critical. If we have too high of a concentration,
then we have too much of a stimulus, we have too great of a stimulus. We can down-regulate the receptors so that the receptors then on
the target cells are not available. On the other hand,
if we have too low of a concentration, not enough of the receptors
are activated on the target cells, and we don't get a big enough
biological response. So the concentration of
the hormone in the blood, you wanna have it at what's
called a u concentration. And this is where it is at
the normal concentration, where we will get an adequate
response from the receptor. The rate of the production of the hormone
is gonna be our most regulated aspect. And it is going to be regulated by both
positive and negative feedback loops. The other thing about the hormone
system is that the hormones are delivered by the blood. And because they're delivered by the
blood, it is a very, very slow delivery. With the nervous system, the nerve is
butting right up against its target cell, so the response is immediate. It's within seconds. But with the hormonal system,
the response can be minutes to hours. So it's a much,
much slower type of a response. The other thing about it is that
the delivery of these hormones can be dependent on mass action because some
of these hormones are bound to carriers. So, if the hormone is bound to its
carrier, which is what's shown here, then that hormone can come off from
the carrier and become a free agent. So, it's free within the bloodstream. And then it's able to
bind to its receptor, which is going to be on the cell or
within the cell. In the case of the hormones
that are bound to carriers, these are usually steroid hormones. These are usually lipid soluble hormones. And so they have to be bound to
a carrier in order to be able to move through the blood stream. So they're bound to a protein carrier, and this protein carrier then has to have
low affinity so that the hormone can be pulled off the carrier to bind
to the target cell receptor. Cuz we want the hormone to be released
from the carrier to bind to its receptor, which has high affinity. So the equation then is
pulled towards the receptor, and this is what's known
by mass action laws. And then lastly, the concentration of the
hormone will be governed by its rate of degradation or removal from the body. And it can be degraded either in the liver
or by the kidney, excreted by the kidney. Okay so we have actually three
different types of hormones and we can classify them by
their chemical nature. But first are the peptide or
protein hormones. These can be anywhere from
three amino acids or bigger. These hormones are first synthesized
on ruffin to plastic reticulum as what as known as the preprohormone
this is an inactive species. And the preprohormone then, this protein, will be further cleaved,
as it's packaged and moved to the Golgi. And once it's in the Golgi, which is
another organelle system within the body, then it's cleaved to a prohormone. In some cases,
the prohormone is active, but in most cases the prohormone
is also inactive. And in the Golgi, then, these hormones
will be packaged into secretory vesicles. And the secretory vesicles,
then with the stored hormone inside, the hormone is now cleaved one more
time to form the active species. So the pro hormone then is cleaved
to give us the active hormone and that's occurring within
the secretory vesicles. In these cells that
are secreting the peptide or protein hormones, the secretory
vesicles packaged with the hormone these secretory vesicles can
sit in the cytoplasm for long periods of time and they'll sit
there until there's a secretagogue, that is a signal that comes to the cell
and tells the cell to secrete it. The cell then will have an increase in
calcium, in the intercellular calcium, or an increase in cyclic AMP. And either of those signals, will cause, then, the secretion of these
hormones from the cells. But these hormones are pre-packaged. And because they're pre-packaged,
they can be released as needed. So they're synthesize, and
they're waiting for the signal. To be secreted. The other thing about these
is that they are proteins, and so once they're into the blood
they have a very short half life. So we have a short half lives. They do not require a carrier because
they are soluble within the plasma, and they are synthesized and stored. An example of one of these
hormones would be insulin. So insulin for instance,
is made as a preprohormone. Insulin is packaged,
is then cleaved as it moves from the rough endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi,
and there it's packaged into vesicles. And then once it moves into the vesicle,
the insulin then becomes cleaved. The cleavage section from the insulin
molecule is called a c peptide. And it turns out that the c peptide
also has biological activity, and the two are going to be present in
equal molar ratio within the vesicle. When the insulin is secreted the c
peptide is also released into the blood. The second type of hormones
are the hormones that are derivative of cholesterol and these hormones
are called steroid hormones. They are made by the adrenal glands,
by the gonads, and by the placenta of
the pregnant female. These steroid hormones
are not soluble in plasma. They are lipid soluble, so they have to be transported in
the blood on carrier proteins. These hormones have to be
synthesized on demand. They can not be stored within membrane
bound vesicles within the cytoplasm. Because they're able to go past
the little membrane vesicles. They're soluble and lipid. So when you need any of these hormones
then, they have to be synthesized. Once they're synthesized then
they have to be secreted. So these hormones take
a little bit more time for them to increase in tighter or
increasing amount within the blood. The other thing is that they have to
be transported on carrier proteins. So they are bound to the carrier protein,
the carrier protein is made in the liver, they're bound to the carrier protein and
then delivered to the tissues. Then pulled off from the carrier protein
and then used within the tissues. Many times, these steroid hormones are converted to a more active
species within the target tissues and we'll talk about that when we
get to the specific instances. For instance, the testosterone,
which is made in male. This is the male sex hormone. The testosterone can be converted
to a much more higher active form, which is dihydrotestosterone,
which is DHT. Testosterone can also be
converted from the male hormone, can be converted to estrogen
within the tissue as well. So testosterone can be
converted by an enzyme, either to DHT, or to estrogen,
depending upon the target tissue. The last of these hormones is
the amino acid derivatives and what's shown here
are derivatives of tyrosine. So we have epinephrine as
one of these hormones. It's made in the adrenal gland. The epinephrine is soluble in plasma and has a very short half-life
of seconds to minutes. The epinephrine will bind
to the same receptors that, the adrenergic receptors that
the neuroepinephrine binds to. So it's sort of a backup system for
the sympathetic nervous system. Tyrosine derivatives can also be
made into thyroxine or into T3. Thyroxine, which is shown here,
is the thyroid hormone. These are insoluble in plasma. They are transported via
carriers to their target tissues. And they have a very long half life,
because they are bound to the carrier. Their half lives are on
the order of hours to days. And in fact, these hormones have a half
life, T4 has a half life of seven days. Interestingly enough, these hormones
are converted in the target tissue. So, T4, which is what's shown here, cuz
it has four iodine residues on it, can be converted to T3, which is the other active
species, by removing one of the iodines. So let's talk a little bit
about the transport carriers. The transport carriers as I said, extend
the life of the hormone in the blood and that the thyroid hormones is several days,
the steroid hormones, testosterone and estrogen is on the order
of 60 to 90 minutes. They also importantly, they sequester
the hormone from its target cell. As long as the hormone is on the carrier
and is bound to the carrier, it's not able to enter and
to engage into the receptor. So, the only hormone
that's actually active of these is going to be the free hormone,
and the free hormone is going to be very, very small concentrations
within the blood. Because it's not very
soluble within the blood. So, it's being released from the carrier
just locally at the tissue, and that will be the carrier, that will be the hormone
that's able to bind to its' receptor. The total concentration of the hormone is
going to reflect the free plus the bound. So as you look at the total
concentration then by saying antibody you will see what's bound
as well as what's free. But it's only the free
that's going to be active. So why is this important? You could have an instance where you
have an individual who is put on birth control pills. So she's taking estrogen. And as she's taking estrogen,
estrogen causes a secretion of a hormone,
of a carrier from the liver. For the thyroid hormone. So her total amounts of thyroid hormone
which is circulating within the blood, can rise. This hormone is then bound to this
new carrier, to this extra carrier, and even though you have a large amount
of material that's bound to the carrier it's the free hormone that's
the important amount. So the person could have normal
amounts of free hormone, but very high amounts of hormone bound to
a carrier, and be perfectly normal. And we'll talk about this some more
when we talk about the thyroid gland. Now these different classes of hormones
also differ in their receptor types. So the hormones which
are soluble in plasma, they're the ones that are hydrophilic
material, so peptide derivatives. They bind to receptors which
are present on the cell's surface, and that's what's shown here. And there are essentially three different
types of receptors that they can bind to. These receptors are integral
membrane protein, so they're inserted within
the plasma membrane. The first is one where you have
a tyrosine kinase linked situation, and this is the receptor for growth hormone. What this means is that the hormone,
when the hormone binds to this receptor, that an enzyme, which is tyrosine kinase, kinase means it puts a phosphate group on
something, is recruited to the receptor. And then that second messenger signaling
then starts a cascade of events which changes the metabolism of the cell. In the second case which
is the case of insulin, the insulin binds to its receptor,
that receptor itself is a tyrosine kinase. So binding the insulin to its receptor
activates the tyrosine kinase and you now get a phosphorylation cascade where we
change again the metabolism of the cell. And again, it's a very rapid second
messenger signaling within the cell. And the last one is
the G coupled receptors. And the G coupled receptors are using,
in some cases, adenosine cyclase to cause changes,
metabolic changes within the cells. And again, we're activating
second messenger cascades, which will then rapidly change
the metabolism of the cell and this is the type of receptor
that we see for glucagon. We also have the steroid hormones and the thyroid hormone, and
they're both soluble in lipids. And so these two types of hormones
can cross the plasma membrane and enter directly into
the interior of the cell. And because they can enter
into the interior of the cell, their receptors are inside the cells. So these receptors are receptors that
are going to bind to the DNA, and activate gene transcription. That is they're gonna change
the type of messenger RNA, and proteins that are gonna be
made by this particular cell. They're changing the activity of the DNA. In every case, we can have multiple
types of receptors on a target cell. For instance,
the beta cell of the pancreas has receptors on it that
regulate its activity. And those receptors they can be
receptors for epinephrine on it. There's also receptors for
acetylcholine on that same cell. So it's going to the net
effect of these receptors and whether they're activated and
how active they are, will be determine what the outcome
is from that given cell. The other thing is you should remember
are that there are large numbers of these receptors on the cell surface, there's not
just one receptor on the cell surface, but many, many, many copies of
receptors on the cell surface. And also many copies of
the transcription factors, that is the nuclear receptors
which are within these cells. First, binding the steroid hormones or
for binding the thyroid hormones. The target cell sensitivity
is depends on its receptor. So, the affinity of the receptors,
as we said, has to be high affinity for these hormones because we have very
low concentrations of the hormone. Secondly, the receptor number, the target
cells that have very high numbers of receptors on its cell surface for
a given hormone, are very, very sensitive to that particular hormone. And then third, competition. Competition is that some of these hormones
are very similar in structure, and they can bind to the receptors. So for instance,
the mineral corticoid receptor can cortisol combined to it and
aldosterone combined to it. And to prevent cortisol from binding
to the that mineral corticoid receptor then the cell has a protective mechanism
for inactivating the cortisol. And lastly, saturation and again this is
when all the receptors that are present on the cell's surface
are bound by the hormone. All the receptors are occupied. So we'd have maximal activity at that time
or maximal response from the target cell. So it's sort of difficult
to think about this. This is all abstract and I'm giving you sort of laundry
lists of things to remember. And they're the type of things where it's
difficult to think about, because we're not talking about a particular hormone or
a particular activity. So let's go through and look at these
different kinds of stimuli that can activate the hormones or
the endocrine systems, and the first of these would be that we
have neuron that's going to become targeted by a stimulus, and so this neuron
then is going to secrete a hormone, and it's called a neuroendocrine cell. This neuron can sense the concentration
of sodium that's within the blood. And by sensing the concentration of
sodium, as sodium rises within the blood, this particular neuron
becomes activated and secretes a hormone called
anti-diuretic hormone. This hormone works on the kidney, and causes the kidney to move water from the
presumptive urine back into the blood so it dilutes down the amount of
sodium that's within the blood. So this is called a neural control and
the neuron is secreting from what's called a posterior pituitary,
a part of the brain. In the second kind of a situation, we have
a hormone, which is regulating a hormone, which is regulating a hormone,
which is regulating a hormone. So, under this conditions are stimulus
could be that we have low plasma glucose. If we have low plasma glucose
then the hypothalamus, again, the portion of your brain can
sense that from the blood, and it will secrete the first hormone which
is growth hormone releasing hormone. That works on the pituitary
cell to secrete growth hormone. And the growth hormone then works on
the liver, which is its target cell, and the liver then, or
the bone which are its target cells. So here we have one hormone,
which is controlling another hormone, which is controlling a third. So we have a series of hormones, and
this is a complex negative feedback loop. And in the last case, we have the stimulus
directly activates the final gland, and that is, is that if we
have low blood calcium levels. So we have low blood calcium levels,
we can activate the parathyroid gland. And the parathyroid gland secretes
the parathyroid hormone, and the parathyroid hormone works on bone. And this bone then will release calcium. And the calcium then is the negative
feedback loop which removes our original initiating signal. So this can be very complicated, the other
illustration I could have given for this last one is the pancreas and
that is where we are secreting insulin, glucose rises in the blood, insulin is
secreted from the pancreatic beta cell. This then would be insulin, and
the insulin works on the target cell which is the muscle or fat to take
the glucose back up into the body. So we're gonna have very complicated
systems and we're gonna deal with each of these systems separately
at a later time in the course. That's how we turn on the system. So how do we turn off the system? We can turn off the system
both locally and systemically. So we can turn off the system
locally at the gland itself. This would be through
receptor desensitization. If we simply remove the receptor for the hormone in the target cell,
from the cell surface for instance. If it's an insulin receptor, and
we remove it from the cell's surface, then the target cell which is a skeletal
muscle, cannot see the insulin, does not bind the insulin,
and won't respond. The alternative is that you can
degrade the actual receptor. So you can remove it from the target
cell surface and degrade it. The type two diabetic is a situation
where we had receptor desensitization. So the type two diabetes
is where that individual does not respond correctly to insulin. Insulin is present in the system,
but the receptor is desensitized. And so,
you don't get the movement of glucose from the blood into the skeleton
muscle cells correctly. To hide it, to remove this rise
in blood glucose due to feeding. The other way of controlling this is
through the negative feedbacks and that's obviously what we were just talking
about, where if you have the stimulus, and that was if you had a high
sodium within the blood and then we move water back by this hormone, anti diuretic hormone, then move water
back to the kidney to dilute that sodium. Then we remove that initiating signal and that's simply a regular
negative feedback system. Okay.
So one of our general concepts then. So the first is that we have peptide
hormones, and they're soluble in plasma. They bind to cell surface receptors. They're fast-acting and
they're gonna have short half lives. Secondly, we have thyroid hormones and
steroid hormones, and these are insoluble in plasma, the act
by intercellular receptors to change transcription, that is to change the DNA
expression, or the gene expression. They're slow acting, and
they're gonna have long half lives. Third, we have binding proteins,
that are called carriers, that regulate the hormone
availability to the target cell. They'd regulate the physiologic
function and the half lives. The carriers extend the half
lives of these hormones. Fourth, the hormone releases
under neural control, hormonal control,
nutrient control, or ion control. So, we can have different types of signals
which are going to regulate whether or not the hormone is going to be secreted,
or be synthesized and secreted. Five, signaling is regulated by changing
the plasma hormone concentration This is, by far, the most common site for
regulation. But you can also change
the target cell sensitivity. You can do so by removing the receptors
from the cell surface, or, you can simply uncouple the receptors so that you
combine the hormone to the receptor. But, it doesn't activate the second
messenger signalling within the cell. So, it's effectively turned off,
so it's a desensitized. By its receptor. Okay, so we will come back and
look at all of these different points, when we are dealing with the endocrine
systems themselves, with all the different individual endocrine glands,
much later in the course, okay. So see you then.