Welcome. So today we'll have our last lecture
on the cardiovascular system. And what we want to talk about is how the
entire system, that is the heart itself and the vasculature,
are regulated in order to maintain the pressures within the body that
are compatible with the needs of the body. So we have several objectives
set that we need to consider. And the first is that we want to describe
the reflex control of the blood pressure. Secondly, we want to explain
how baroreceptors or pressure sensors control
the blood pressure. Third, explain how other sensors,
such as the cardiopulmonary receptors, and volume receptors within the kidneys
can control blood pressure. And fourth, we want to describe
the central control of blood pressure, in response to certain perturbations
such as exercise whether it's aerobic exercise or anaerobic
exercise in states of hypertension. So let's get started then in
considering all of these factors. Now the first thing that we need to
remember is that this entire system is governed essentially by factors
which are unique to the heart. And that is that the heart can control
the stroke volume and the heart rate. So cardiac output is controlled by changes
in stroke volume and in heart rate. But secondly that we can control
the system by changes that are more properties of the vasculature and
the heart itself. And that we can change preload
that is the filling of the heart by changing the way the venus return
is brought back to the heart. That is how much blood is returned
to the heart at a given time. And then the preload,
post-load, afterload, sorry. It's called afterload, and the afterload
is simply the amount of pressure that the heart has to generate in
order to open the aortic valve or to open the pulmonic valve to allow for
distribution to those particular areas to either the circulatory system, which
is systemic or to the pulmonic system. Now, the pre load and the after load are governed by multiple factors,
as well as by the heart itself. So, we're gonna consider then,
how all of this is coordinated, and the coordination is through a reflex loop. So the reflex loop is
what's diagrammed here. So we have within the system,
as all systems, we have sensors which are bring
information into the central control site. And the central control site or
integrator, is where there's a set point. So these pressure sensors then, are
present within the cardiac system itself. It is within the heart itself, and
also within the systemic vasculature. It can also be present within organs
such as the kidney, and in the lung. These pressure sensors then, are sending
information back to the integrator. And the integrator is called the
Medullary Cardiovascular Control Center. It is present in the medulla of the brain
stem, that's why it's called medullary. So this particular control center then,
has a set point and it will compare the information that's coming in
from the body to the given set point. Depending on whether or
not the pressures within the system are higher than the set point or
lower than the set point. It will determine which is
the outflow that is to our effectors. So in the conditions where we have low
pressure, if we have low pressure or low volume, then the sympathetic
nervous system is activated. And the sympathetic nervous system
will increase norepinephrine discharge at the terminals that is
the synapses of the nervous system. And if it acts on the heart through
the beta one adrenergic receptors, we can increase heart rate and
we can increase stroke volume. And in addition to that, the sympathetic
system works on a gland, which is called the adrenal gland, and in particular the
adrenal medulla, this is a central area of the gland, which secretes
a catecholamines called epinephrine. And epinephrine also can act on
the beta one adrenergic receptors to increase heart rate and stroke volume. And so under these conditions then,
we can increase stroke volume. And by increasing stroke volume, that will lead to an increase
in mean arterial pressure. And that then,
can correct our low-pressure system. Conversely, if we have a high pressure
situation, then with the high pressure situation, the parasympathetic
system is activated, and in activation of the parasympathetic system,
we then have release of acetylcholine. The acetylcholine works on the muscarinic
receptors of the heart, and the muscarinic receptors of the heart
will cause a slowing of the heart rate. So you decrease heart rate, and
by decreasing heart rate we can decrease the cardiac output, and
therefore, or thereby decrease the mean arterial pressure or
the pressures within the system. So, this is our general reflex loops. Let's consider first some of the sensors
that are present in this loop. So, one of the major sensors that's within
the loop are called the baroreceptors, and these receptors are stretch receptors. So, they are sensitive to the transmural changes in tension in
the walls of the vessel. So, blood vessels. They are located within the carotid
sinus and the aortic arch. And they respond to changes,
as I said, in pressure or stretch. And that these give information
on a minute to minute basis in controlling of blood pressure. They send the signals then to
the medullary cardiac control center. If there is an increase in
mean arterial pressure, then this will increase the firing of
the baroreceptors, and that in turn causes a decrease in the firing of sympathetics
and an increase in parasympathetic. So the baroreceptors are effectively
the brakes of the sympathetic system. So if we have high pressures within
the system, they are activated, they go in the same direction
as the change in blood pressure. So if the blood pressures increase,
there are receptor firing increases and the decreases the sympathetic
discharge and increases the parasympathetic system and we then
decrease pressure within the system. Conversely, if there's a decrease
in the arterial pressure, then the baroreceptor firing is decreased,
and under those conditions, sympathetic discharge increases and we have a decrease
in the parasympathetic symptom. So, we increase sympathetic
tone when there is a decrease in baroreceptor firing. All right, so when does this happen? Well this happens to you all the time. So let's say you were lying in bed,
and as you're lying in bed, then the blood is distributed
throughout the body in an even manner. Now, the telephone rings, and
you jump out of bed really quickly, and as you jump out of bed quickly,
all the blood, or a lot of the blood is flowing to your
feet due to the change in gravity. All right so you're going from a prone
position to a vertical position, and now we have gravity pull the blood Just
transiently is moving towards the feet. That means the baroreceptors,
which are located in the carotid arches, which is up here in your neck and at the
aortic arch, which is right coming out of the heart,
those sensors then detect a less stretch. There's less volume in the system. The volume is going toward your feet,
and so there's less stretch, and with less stretch,
the baroreceptors decrease their firing. When they decrease their firing,
sympathetic discharge occurs, and the sympathetics cause a basal
constriction by activating the alpha one adrenergic receptors,
which are present along the blood vessels. And by doing so, then they increase
resistance within the system. And by increasing resistance within
the system, then we can correct for our transiently low cardiac output and
low pressures. So that's an example of
orthostatic hypotension. Another one is when, and
I'm sure all of you've seen this, when you have these guards who
are guarding the royal castle in London, and all of a sudden one of these
poor fellows just topples over. And what's happening is that as
he's standing at attention and he's standing at attention and
he's standing at attention, then eventually gravity pull is
such that it's pulling the blood, to pulling into his feet, and
eventually he becomes light-headed. He has an insufficient amounts of
blood being delivered to the brain and the body just, he gets dizzy,
and he collapses. Once he collapses, he's in a prone
position, and now the blood distribution to the brain is increased, and
he wakes up, and he's perfectly fine. So, this is called
orthostatic hypertension. Now, in addition to the baroreceptors,
which are very fast in firing, the baroreceptors are the ones who that
do our minute-to-minute type of control, we also have other receptors. For instance, and you'll hear more
about some of these when we talk about the respiratory system, but
we also have chemoreceptors. And these chemoreceptors
can detect CO2 levels, the level of protons, and
the level of oxygen within the system. These receptors will send information not
only to the cardiovascular central control system, but
also to the respiratory control system, which is also located within the medulla. And for instance, if there's a rise
in CO2 then these receptors will cause an increase in sympathetic tone,
will increase the rate of breathing so the skeletal
muscles will start to contract faster, so you start to breathe at a faster
rate to blow off the CO2. There are other receptors which are
present within the hypothalamus itself, and these receptors are for
controlling temperature. So, you all know that if you're out on
a hot day that you have vasodilation, that is you have opening of
the capillaries beneath the skin, so that some of the heat can be
radiated off into the environment, and this is to remove heat from the body. And under those conditions,
your skin may become reddish in color. Or as you run, you generate a lot of heat
from the working of the skeletal muscle, and again,
there will be dilation into the capillary beds beneath the surface of the skin
to emit heat through radiation. Conversely, if you're cold, then those
capillary beds are not perfused, and the blood stays within
the core of the body, and into the central portion of the body. So the distribution, then, into these
capillary beds, whether we're sending blood out into the capillary beds,
which could cause lowering of pressure, or we're moving the blood back toward
the central core, which could increase central pressure, then that's
governed by the hypothalamus and that's governed through the region
that's governing body temperature. And then we also have the kidney. Now, the kidney is
controlling fluid volume. The kidney is sensitive
to hormone control and we'll talk about this at
the end of the course. But in the kidney,
there can be controlled to either pee out more volume if there's an excess
of volume or high pressure, or to retain volume, that is to make
very concentrated urine, and to move the fluids back
into the blood space. So under the condition where we have an
excess of volume, or high pressure within the system, then there's more volume being
delivered to the atria of the heart. Will stretch the atria of the heart and
some of the cells that are within the atria of the heart, those cells
when they're stretched, will secrete a hormone and that hormone is called
atrial, for atria, natriuretic factor. This factor acts in the kidney to cause an
increase in the loss of fluid into urine. So it increases fluid output into urine. Conversely, when we have a situation when
we have dehydration or a loss in volume, then there's the hypothalamus portion
of the brain secretes a hormone called anti-diuretic hormone or vasopressin, and
this hormone acts, again, on the kidney. But in this condition, it's moving
water from the kidney tubules back into the blood circulation,
and we concentrate urine. All right, so
lets consider a few examples, and one of them would be hypotension. So hypotension, as occurs in hemorrhage. So in hemorrhage, then we have a loss of
volume, and under these conditions, and the loss of volume could be let's
say we lose a liter of blood. We had an accident, we cut our leg,
and we've lost a liter of blood. That decrease in volume means
that the baroreceptors then, will decrease their firing,
and by decreasing firing, then it will increase the sympathetic
drive within the body. By increasing the sympathetic drive,
we increase the resistance, that is, you'll have alpha adrenergic
receptors that are present on the blood vessels will
cause vasoconstriction. So, we'll have contraction of the smooth
muscle and we'll constrict those areas to move blood back to the heart, okay,
to try to maintain our cardiac output. In addition, we will activate
on the heart the beta one, so we have the beta one adrenergics on the
heart, which will increase heart rate and we have the alpha one adrenergics on the
blood vessels, which increase resistance. In addition to that, the kidney will
sense this lowering of blood pressure or this loss in volume, and
the kidney has specific cells, which are called juxtaglomerular cells or
JG cells, and these are actually smooth muscles
cells of arterials within the kidney that can secrete
a chemical called renin. Renin activates a series of reactions, which will lead to an increase in
vasoconstrictors within the system. And the two major vasoconstrictors
are angiotensin II, and again, ADH, or a vasopressin,
which we know is coming from the brain. So those vasoconstrictors will
augment the increase in resistance within the vascular term and cause,
then, further increase in resistance. So this helps then for venous return. It helps to move the blood
back to the heart. There's a third hormone that will be
released under these conditions, and this hormone is called aldosterone,
it's coming from the adrenal glands. Aldosterone works on the kidney
tubule to move sodium and the water back into the body. And so under these conditions, we're
increasing volume of the vasculature. So by increasing volume of the
vasculature, it offsets our loss in volume as we're moving this volume back
from the presumptive urine. By increasing the resistance and
by increasing volume in the vasculature. Then, we're increasing stroke volume
by increasing the preload to the heart. So if you increase preload,
then you increase the stroke volume. And we know that we've
increased heart rate and we have a sympathetic drive which, again,
augments contractility and stroke volume. And this helps to offset the loss
in the cardiac output and to bring cardiac output back
up to where it should be. All right, well what happens
when we're going to exercise? So let's say that you've decided
that you're going to go running and you're running a marathon. So this is a strenuous aerobic exercise. So, at your pre-exercise level, we have a cardiac output of
about five liters per minute. But as you're exercising, you're gonna
have to increase the cardiac output. And this can go as high 20
to 30 liters per minute. Obviously at rest our blood pressure is 70
beats per minute, but our blood pressure will rise to 150 to even 200 beats
per minute as we're exercising. So we're increasing cardiac output,
we're increasing heart rate. And as you know,
that you have a sympathetic drive, and the sympathetic drive is also
increasing stroke volume. All right, so let's think about what's
happening to the body in general. So we have at the beginning,
the basal flow to the muscles, the skeletal muscles,
we're only moving about 20% cardiac output to the skeletal
muscle in our basal resting state. But as we're exercising, then they can receive as much
as 80% of the cardiac output. So we're increasing flow to the skeletal
muscle because they're exercising and they need more oxygen to maintain
their new state of activity. To increase the flow within
the skeletal muscle then we had to dilate the arterials and
when you dilate the arterial, then you're decreasing
the resistance within that system. So that means that our total peripheral
resistance actually will decrease. So from our basal state to
our active state, TPR or total peripheral resistance within
the body is decreased because the size of the vasculature of the capillary beds
within the skeletal muscle are extensive. And so we have a lot of
profusion within that regions, we have a loss in total
resistance within the system. So what does that actually do to the mean
arterial pressures within the system? So we've increased cardiac output but we've decreased total
peripheral resistance. So we've increased mean arterial
pressure but only slightly. So increase of this is slightly and it's offset by the decrease in
the total peripheral resistance. So that's what occurs when we have an
anaerobic, a strenuous anaerobic exercise. But what happens if you're doing
something like aerobic exercise where, I mean anaerobic exercise
where you are lifting weights. So when you're lifting weights,
this is anaerobic exercise. And under these conditions
now as the muscle contracts it actually causes a reactive
hyperemia within these muscles. We're getting an ischemic
event during contraction. And then when we relax, then we will get
hyperaemia within the muscle to wash out the metabolites that occurred during the
contractal state where we had ischemia. So this reactive hyperaemia. So what's happening then to
total peripheral resistance? We're increasing cardiac output because
we're lifting a heavy load, and so we need to have higher cardiac output,
more oxygen delivered to the tissues. But we are also increasing
total peripheral resistance. So under those conditions, then mean
arterial pressure has to increase. So what's happening with
the barrel receptors? Why are the barrel receptors not fighting
us as we're doing all these exercises? And it turns out that the barrel
receptors are able to reset so that just before we do our marathon and
we're gonna increase cardiac output. As you're sitting there and
you're about to take off for the race, the barrel receptors
reset to a higher level. So they allow the system to work at
a higher mean arterial pressure. And the same is occurring then with
the condition of the anaerobic exercise. Then when you're finished with
the exercise, the baroreceptors will reset again, and so the set point
then is changed to a lower state. And the barrier receptors can reset
to constant chronic input and that can occur if we have hypertension. And hypertension is a state where the
heart may be weak and because the heart is weak then it's going to adjust some of
the other parameters within the vascular vasculature to try to increase stroke
volume and to increase cardiac output. So under these conditions, we can have
hypertension, and the hypertension is tolerated because the baroreceptors
reset to a higher level. And hypertension can be anywhere
greater than 139 millimeters of mercury phostolic pressure and greater than 89
millimeters of mercury diastolic pressure. So let's just see how this
is actually occurring. We have a case where we have
hypertension and in hypertension has occurred because we
have weak cardiac muscle. So the weak cardiac muscle means that
there was a lower ejection volume, that is a lower stroke volume. And because we have a lower stroke volume,
then in order to adjust our cardiac output,
we had to increase heart-rate. Okay so by increasing heart-rate,
we then have a situation where we can get, we can augment the loss in cardiac output. But in addition to trying to change just
the pressures within the heart itself, the stroke volume or heart right. Then we have, also,
a change in the vasculature and that is, is that the kidney, will detect
that we had low cardiac output. And because the kidney
senses low cardiac output, it will hold water within the system. So here,
we have diagrammed the injection volume. That is the stroke volume on the Y axis, and our left ventricular and
diastolic volume on the X axis. So our normal heart sits
here at 100 mils of the left ventricular and diastolic volume. And it has a stroke
volume that's about 70. With the weak heart,
the cardiac output drops and so now at the same end diastolic volume, we have a stroke volume
that's only 35 milliliters. As the kidney holds water then by
holding water and we're moving the end diastolic volume up to B, and B,
which is now 200 millilitres. So our heart is stretched. We have a lot of volume in the ventricle,
the heart myosiis, or stretch. By stretching them,
look what happens to our stroke volume. So the stroke volume increases, and we now
have a stroke volume which is close to 50. So, we've improved the stroke volume of
the system by holding water in the system. So, our stroke volume has increased. The problem is, is that by
increasing the fluid retention, or fluid within the system, we have increased
pressure within the system, and so that means we've increased the afterload. So, although we have
augmented the preload, that is the filling of the heart, and
we've gotten a better stroke volume by stretching the heart we've
also increased afterload. And the afterload on
the weak heart is difficult. So that's the problem then,
is that as we're trying to improve the performance of the heart by
adjusting it's stroke volume and it's heart rate, we have increases mean
arterial pressure within the system. Has increased as well. And that's due to the amount of
volume that's within the system. Now because we have higher
pressures within the system, we have hyper tension,
then what happens to these individuals? Let's say they have hypertension, and
the problem is on the left ventricle of the heart, and so where does the blood,
what happens to the capillaries? In the capillaries we have
higher hydrostatic pressure. The hydrostatic pressure is increased
across the entire capillary. It's greater than the oncotic pressure. So we have filtration
across the capillaries and in the feet where we have gravity pull, we now have fluid accumulating within
the ankles or within the feet. And so this gives us then
edema in those locations. Okay, so what's our general concepts? So, the first is we have cardiac output
is matched with tissue blood flow by maintaining this mean arterial
blood pressure relatively constant. So cardia output is equal
to mean arterial pressure, divided by total peripheral resistance. If we want to maintain our mean arterial
pressure constant, relatively constant and cardiac output has dropped, that means our
total peripheral resistance must increase in order to keep a constant
mean arterial pressure. Secondly, the baroreceptors will
act as these short term regulators of the arterial blood pressure, and
they provide sensory information to the cardiovascular center which is located
within the medulla, the brain stem. The autonomic nervous
system may outflow from the center maintains
the pressure constant. So, if we have a drop in pressure, we have
a decrease in firing at the baroreceptors will have an increase
in sympathetic drive. And in increase in resistance
within the system. And increase in preload but
we will also increase afterload. If we have the pressure that is too high,
then we have converse. And that is that
the parasympathetic system will cause a decrease in heart and
cardiac output. And a decrease in mean arterial pressures. Third, we have total blood volume
can change the end diastolic volume of the ventricles that is the filling and
thereby change stroke volume. And that is cardiac output is equal
to stroke volume times heart rate. Then fourth, the hemorrhage can reduce the end
diastolic volume leading to hypotension. That when we have a loss in the volume
of the system we have hypotension in the system and the compensatory
response to the hemorrhage is vassal constriction of the arteries and
the arterials. And the capacitance veins then
will receive more blood, and they will then deliver more blood To the
heart, trying to fill the heart better. So our preload will then increase. We'll also get an increase
in heart rate and in contractility by the sympathetic drive. Five, hypotension can result in
either a sudden postural change, that is if we were lying down in bed and we jump out of bed to answer the door bell
or answer the phone, then this change in, from a prone position to
a vertical position can cause a loss in pressure within the head,
and it's just a momentary thing, but the bearer receptors will decrease in
firing, and then will have an increase in sympathetic drive, and that will correct
for the pressures in that region. Six, we have aerobic exercise can increase
cardiac output up to 30 liters per minute. But because it reduces the total
peripheral resistance, because we were vasodilating, and
the blood, so that we're reducing the resistance within the capillaries and
the arterials of the skeletal muscle. Then mean arterial pressure does
not increase as much as it would if we didn't have this offset due to
the vasodilation within the tissues. In weightlifting, that doesn't occur. So we have an increase in cardiac output. An increase in total
peripheral resistance. And an increase in mean arterial pressure. Seven, failure of the heart to
maintain normal cardiac output, can lead to increasing
resistance within the system. Because the system is trying
to augment delivery of blood. To the tissue because it's trying
to maintain main arterial pressure. And that is cardiac output times
total peripheral resistance, is equal to main arterial pressure. So if the cardiac output drops,
the body will try to increase total peripheral resistance in order to
keep main arterial pressure constant. An eight, we have compensation for
decreased encardiac output. That is because we have a weak heart. Then other organs may try
to compensate for this. We'll have an increase in heart rate,
total peripheral resistance, get vasoconstriction of the veins to increase
our preload, and we'll get retention of water by the kidneys, which will
increase the volume within the system. But by doing so,
we also will cause a hypertension so that, it's sort of a balance then
between these different factors. So in the one case, the body's trying
to maintain cardiac outputs that we have adequate profusion of the tissues,
but on the other side of the equation, we are making a weak heart
work against higher pressures. And so, that actually is negative
resolve for that particular heart. And so,
it makes the weaker heart Work even harder in order to maintain
mean arterial pressures. Okay, so the next time that we'll
meet then we're gonna talk about the respiratory system. Okay, see you then, bye-bye.