Greetings, today we wanted to start our
discussion of the cardiovascular system. And in particular we're gonna talk about
the heart and the structure of the heart. And how the heart
activities are coordinated by an electrical conduction system. So the first thing to think about is that
your heart is about the size of your fist. And it sits about here in your
chest with the point of the heart, pointing down towards your feet. What we wanna talk about
is the conduction system of the heart which are specialized
cardiac myocytes. And they are not going to generate
any kind of force or tension but instead, they're gonna electrical
control with in the heart. Secondly, we wanna talk about this
pacemaker activity because as you all know, the heart has an intrinsic beat and
that's due to these pacemaker cells or the electrical conduction system. And third, we want to talk about
how this system is regulated so that you can speed up
your heart as you run. And you can slow the heart as you sleep. And this is mediated by
the autonomic nervous system. And the fourth is we want to relate
the activity of a single cardiac myocyte to the entire electrical
activity of the heart itself. And how a cardiologist is able to
view the electrical activity of the entire heart on what's
known as the electrocardiogram. So we have several things to deal with. The first is what is
the structure of the heart. So the structure of the heart is,
there's actually two pumps in series. We have one which is on the right side and this is the side which is going to send
blood to the lung for oxygenation. And then we have a second pump
which is on the left side and that receives blood from the lung and then
pumps it out to the circulatory system. So we have in essence a movement,
a unidirectional movement of blood through the system
from the right side to the left side. In addition, the right and the left sides
are divided into two compartments or two chambers. The upper is called the atria or
the atrium. And the lower is the ventricle. So we have a right atrium and
a right ventricle, a left atrium and a left ventricle. And the blood is going to move then
between the atria to the ventricles in a very ordered or
unidirectional manner. The thing that we should notice
is that the right atria and the left atria are separated
by what's called a septum. And the right ventricle and the left ventricle are also divided
by what is called the septum. And these septum are made up of
cardiac myocyte so that the electrical activity that's within the two chambers
that is the atria, the right and the left and the ventricle, the right and
the left can be electrically coupled. The second thing to notice is the atrial
and the ventricles are separated and they're separated at the junction
which is called the base of the heart. And this junction between atrial and
ventricle does not consist of cardiac myocytes but
instead it's connective tissue. This effectively isolates the electrical
activity of what's happening in the upper chambers, that is the atria
from the electrical activity of what's happening in the lower chambers or
in the ventricles. And we'll come back to that
thought in a few minutes. So I said to you then that we're
gonna have an electrical activity which will depolarize the cells. And as we depolarize the cells
then you know that in muscle after depolarization is
followed by a contraction. And then we will relax, and before relaxation we have to have
a repolarization of the cells. So the electrical activity will always
be before the contractal events. So what are our electrical activities? They have to go in a unidirectional manner
because we want to have a unidirectional contraction occurring that is in
the atria before the ventricles. This is coordinated by
the electrical conduction system or by the specialized cardiac myocytes
which are called the pacemakers. In the heart, we have several pacemakers. The first is the Sino-Atrial pacemaker or
the SA node, and it is located in the right atrium towards
the upper region of the right atrium. This is a very fast pacemaker and it beats
at about 60 to 100 beats per minutes. The second pacemaker resides at
the junction between the atria and the ventricle on the right side and
that is shown here. And this is the Atrial-Ventricular node or
the AV node. At the AV node, we will have a slight
pause in the electrical activity that's occurring within the atria and
then the AV node will fire. And it fires at about 40
to 60 beats per minute. What's unusual about this
node is that everywhere else across this junction between the atria and
the ventricle, the electrical activity cannot move from
the upper chambers to the lower chambers. But at the AV node, the electrical
signal now will be allowed to move from the atria then
down to the ventricles. So it's the gateway from the upper
chamber to the lower chamber and it brings electrical activity
into the lower chambers. Within the lower chamber itself, within the septum the very next pacemaker
is called the Bundle of His and this Bundle of His will separate
into a right and left bundle. It resides within the septum. So we have a splitting of the Bundle of
His into a left in a right bundle branch. And these will proceed down the septum and up the walls of the ventricles in
what's called the Purkinje fibers. All pacemakers do have an intrinsic beat
but this intrinsic beat is slowest of all, and this is between 25 and
45 beats per minute. Repolarization will occur
in the opposite direction. The entire event takes about
400 to 500 milliseconds. So for every beat in your heart,
where you hear a Lub dub, lub dub. Then this entire conduction
system is going to fire and you will have consequently you
would have a following upon that contraction of both first the atria and
then the ventricles. Now, the pacemaker potential as
you all know has an unstable resting membrane potential and so
it differs from our fast action potential that we saw in the contractile
myocytes which are generating tension. This is the pacemaker potential's called
the slow pacemaker action potential. And it's duration is 150 milliseconds
in contrast to what we saw with the contractile myocytes, where their action potential was
about 200 to 220 milliseconds. So it's shorter in duration and
it is a pacemaker potential in that it has unstable
resting membrane potential. The resting membrane potential starts
at about a minus 55 millivolts and then slowly moves towards threshold and
that threshold is at minus 35 millivolts. When the resting membrane potential, when the membrane potential
reaches minus 35 millivolts, then there is a very rapid opening
of voltage gated calcium channels, which allow calcium to enter the cells and
we have a depolarization of the cells. Then, following that, we have an opening
of the voltage gated potassium channels, the voltage gated calcium channels close,
and we have an opening of a voltage
gated potassium channels. And there is then
a repolarization of the cells. And we return to the lower resting
membrane potential of minus 55 millivolts. So a few things to notice,
one is is that this is slow movement from the minus
55 millivolts to a minus 35 millivolts or
threshold is called Phase 4, and Phase 4 has the,
some odd activities for channels. One of them is that there is a channel
called the Sodium funny channel. This is a voltage gated sodium channel
which physiologists thought was very odd because it opened at a very low voltage
and then closed at a very low voltage. Unlike the voltage gated sodium channel
that we see in the very rapid upstroke or depolarization that occurs
in the contractile myocytes. So these funny channels then are opening
and closing at a very low voltage. Secondly, the funny channels, as they
open and close, and the membrane voltage then drifts or moves towards threshold
we also open calcium voltage channels. And so voltage gated calcium channels
open and close during this period. So Phase 4 then has the opening and
closing of the sodium funny channels, and it has also the opening and closing
of a voltage gated calcium channels. Once threshold is met,
then Phase 0 begins. And in Phase 0, now,
there is a more rapid depolarization, and this is due to the opening of
the voltage gated calcium channels. The voltage gated calcium channels open,
calcium enters the cell, and we have depolarization. The voltage-gated calcium channels close,
and we begin Phase 3 with the opening of
the voltage-gated potassium channels. And as potassium leaves these cells to
enter into the extracellular space, then the cells repolarize. Now as you know, as you go through
their day the heart rate can change. So if you're sitting here, your heart rate
will have a basal rate of about 70 to maybe 80 beats per minute, but if you
decide that you wanna go running then your heart has to increase its cardiac output. That is you have to increase the amount
of blood that's being pumped to the body because of the oxygen demands of
the skeletal muscles in your legs. And to do that the heart will increase
it's rate of firing or it's rate of beat. This is done predominantly by
changing the phase 4 duration by changing the phase 4 duration in
the action potential we can more rapidly move from our basal minus 55 resting
membrane potential to threshold. This is under the control of
the sympathetic nervous system. The sympathetic nervous system speeds up
the heart rate, then by decreasing, or increasing the closure time speeding up
the closure of the potassium channels, the voltage gate of potassium channels
are Phase 3, and then opening the, the time for opening of the voltage
gated sodium funny channels, and of our voltage gated calcium channels. So we much more, so
it takes less time to reach threshold. When you have a heart rate which is
a greater than 100 beats per minute, this is said to be tachycardia. Obviously, you need to have
tachycardia when you're running, but then when you stop and
you sit down and relax, then your heart rate will again fall
to its resting membrane potential and is not maintained at greater
than a hundred beats per minute. Now you also can control
the heart rate and that is as we can slow it down as
I just indicated and by slowing down the heart rate to less than 60 beats
per minute this is called bradycardia. But in a daily life we have
a resting heart rate potential, is between about 60 and
80 beats per minute. And this is done through the input from
the parasympathetic nervous system. The parasympathetic nervous system
acts through the muscarinic receptors, which are sitting on the heart. And it will cause a prolonged opening of the phase three voltage
gated potassium channels. And by doing that,
we decrease the level of hyperpolarization within the cells so that
we are actually hyperpolarizing the cells, more potassium is leaving these cells
than under normal circumstances. So instead of starting at
a minus 55 mini volts, we may be starting at
a minus 65 millivolts. In addition to that,
the nervous system slows the opening of the sodium
funny channels and obviously the voltage
gated calcium channels so that the slope for
Phase 4, then is reduced. So it takes longer for
the cells to reach threshold. And by doing so then it slows heart rate. So when do we have a slowed heart rate? So we have a slowed heart
rate when we're sleeping, but you can also have a slow
heart rate through training. For instance my son went
in to have his wisdom teeth taken out, and when he went
into have his wisdom teeth taken out, he sat down in the office
of the oral surgeon. And the nurse came out and
she took his heart rate. And then she went back to the oral surgeon
and said, he has a heart rate of 50. This is someone who's about to go in for a surgery to have his wisdom teeth
removed and he has a heart rate of 50. It was I, who was sitting on the chair,
I would probably have a heart rate of 150 because I would be nervous so
my heart rate would increase to the sympathetic drive to the beta one
of the nurgic receptors on the heart. But this individual, this fella actually
has a heart rate of only a minus 50 so the surgeon came out and took one look at
him and he said okay, what do you play? He said soccer. Put him under. What was that about? It simply is that athletes with training,
have a much higher parasympathetic tone or a parasympathetic activity on their
hearts, so that the heart then, at basal level, so as that resting
membrane potential of these hearts, the heart rate will be much slower. So they have a much slower beat. And in fact, Lance Armstrong,
who is a famous bicyclist, was said to have a heart beat of
about 35 beats per minute at rest. So having a slow heart rate that
is a bradycardia can be perfectly normal in a trained individual. But in a person who has
a pathology in the heart, bradycardia is an indication that the
heart is weak or that there's something wrong with the conduction system and we'll
talk about this again in a few minutes. All right, so now let's start thinking a bit about the
electrical activity of the entire heart. So we've been talking about the electrical
activity of the nodes in particular, and now we want to talk about how do we
find out what the electrical activity of the entire heart is. And you can do this by placing
electrodes on the surfaces of the body. And what those electrodes will pick up is
the depolarization of the entire atria, or the depolarization of
the entire ventricle. So let's see what we mean by this. So we said that we have
firing that's going to be for the unidirectional firing within
this electrical conductive system. And first we will have
the SA node will fire. And that the SA node fires, it will
lead to depolarization of the atrium. So the depolarization spreads
across all of the atrial cells, and these are the contractile
cells of the atrium. And it does so by moving through those gap junctions
that are located between the cells. When the depolarization reaches
the AV node, there's a slight pause. And then the AV node will fire. And when the AV node fires,
then the electrical signal is sent across the AV boundary, that is across our
cardiac skeleton, into the septum. And it follows the bundle of His
within the septum in both the left and the right branches and
then down through the Purkinje fibers and up the walls of the ventricles. So the depolarization of the heart wall
occurs also in a very specific manner, and that is that we will have
depolarization from the inside of the wall to the outside. So we depolarize along what's called the
endocardium, that's the inner portion of the wall, out to the outer portion of
the wall, which is called the epicardium. So we have movement then
of the electrical signal, through the ventricles, and
out through the walls of the ventricles. And as we said, repolarization will
occur in the opposite direction, where we move from the outside of the
walls, towards the inside of the walls, from epicardium to endocardium. And from the apex, which is the tip
of the heart, up towards the base, which is here at the top
of the ventricles. Now this electrical
activity can be picked up by the electrodes that we placed
on the surface of the body. We do not see the deflections
that would be due, just simply, to the activity of the nodes. But we can see the summation of all
the changes across the contractile cells. That is, the cells of the atrium and
the cells of the ventricles. Because they're sufficiently large, when
we sum all of that electrical activity together, that we can pick it
up on a surface electrode. And this trace that we can pick up over
time is called the electrocardiogram. So let's see what that looks like. So the electrocardiogram is
what's diagrammed here, and the first thing that we notice is
that we have a positive deflection. And this is called the P wave, and
the P wave is our atrial depolarization. So this is the sum of all of
the contractile cells which are within the atrial that are now depolarizing. There's then a [INAUDIBLE] or
an isoelectric interval, and then we start with a QRS complex. And the QRS complex is
the ventricular depolarization. So the AV node fires, and then we have the
ventricles themselves are depolarizing. And eventually we have
another isoelectric interval, which called the ST interval which
we'll talk about in a second. And then another wave, a positive wave,
which is called the T wave. And the T wave is
the ventricular repolarization. So this is where all of the cells now
are repolarizing within the ventricle. So a couple of things to notice. So, we said that we have this PR interval,
and that these intervals are timed,
like the entire sequence is timed. So if you look at this electrocardiogram,
on the x axis, this is the millivolts. This is the actual potentials
that you're recording. But along the x axis, this is time. This is a sequence,
a timed sequence of events. And the PR segment is the time
between when the SA node fires and the AV nodes fires. The ST segment is essentially phase
two of the fast action potential. This is that isoelectric point where we
had calcium is entering the cells, and potassium is leaving
the contractile cells. And we have no change really because
of the positive charges entering, and the positive charges which
are leaving the cells. And so that's an isoelectric event, and
it's phase 2 of the fast action potential. And then R-R is our heart rate. Now, if we were to look at the ECG, so
this is an electrocardiogram or an ECG. If we were to look at this tracing for
someone who is running, what are the parts, what are the intervals
that may change in time? So let's think about that. The first thing is that we have to
repolarize the heart faster, so that we can have the next beat. So the very first thing that must
change would be that that ST segment has to shorten. Because phase 2 of the contractile
myocyte, that action potential, phase 2, must shorten. So ST would be one of the segments
which we would say would shorten. The second phase that might
shorten would be obviously R-R. That has to shorten because
we're increasing heart rate. So R-R will shorten. And then what's the third
phase that's going to shorten? So let's think about that. The third phase that
shortens is the movement of depolarization through the atria. So it's how quickly the atria depolarizes. And the atria will depolarize
slightly faster, so that we will have a slightly
shorter PR segment. So the PR segment also shortens. What about the QRS? Turns out that the time it takes for the ventricles to depolarize,
it will not change. So or it changes so slightly that we
really can't pick it up on the ECG. So we have three segments then, which
are changing the R-R which is heart rate. The ST which is the time between
the depolarization and repolarization. We must shorten that in order
to speed up the heart rate. And then we also can see some
shortening of the PR segment. And that is the time for the electrical
activity to move through the atrium. All right, so
let's have a little bit of terminology. So the rhythm, if it's initiated by the SA
node, no matter what it's rate, whether it's tachycardia, bradycardia, or normal
rate, this is called a sinus rhythm. And for every P wave,
you'll have a QRS complex following it, and then a T wave. Under certain conditions,
you can have an ectopic foci, some rogue cells which all
of a sudden start firing. And they're no longer listening
to the beat of the fastest node. And the fastest node is the SA node, and it usually sets the heart rate for
the entire heart. Under these conditions, the second set
of cells which is firing is called an ectopic foci, and they can interfere
with the sequential movement of electrical activity that
we have just described. And when that occurs, you can get
arrhythmias, you can get a skipped beat, you can get improper filling of
the chambers either of the atria, if it occurs in the atria, or of the
ventricle if it occurs in the ventricle. And under these conditions,
if the chamber is contracting so rapidly because of an arrhythmia,
then you may not be able to feel it. And if this occurs in the ventricle,
this could be lethal. You can have a heart attack. And the other thing that we have to
remember then are the electrical activities of the entire heart can be observed on the clinical ECG and
that the time intervals as well as whether a specific wave occurs gives
information to the cardiologist as to how well the electrical conduction
system of the heart is performing. There are some diseases where, for
instance, it takes too long for the ventricles to depolarize, and so
you will have a widening of the QRS. Or you can have other diseases where you have problems with
re-polarization of the heart. And under those conditions then it
affects the T-wave and the ST segment. All right, so let's look at a case. So our case is Mrs. R, she's 80 years old and her normal
resting heart beat is 85 beats per minute. She usually goes to the gym everyday and
she works out on an electrical stepper. And on Friday she was unable
to do her morning exercises. She got up in the morning and
didn't feel very well. By time she got to the gym she tried
to get onto the electrical stepper, but she just couldn't get enough energy and
was unable to do her exercises. And she felt so badly that she decided
to go and see her cardiologist. And when she came in,
he took her heart rate, and he found that her heart rate
was 30 beats per minute. She has bradycardia and
is this from due to athletic training? No. Her normal resting heart
rate was 85 on Thursday and on Friday it's now 30, so
something dramatic has happened to the electrical conduction
system within her heart. So he decided to run an electrocardiogram
to see what changes had occurred within her heart, and their electrocardiogram
is what's showing here so one the y axis we have mligoals and
on the x axis we have time. As you can see there are P
waves which are present and the P waves have a set time interval. So the P waves have a R occurring so
that means that the SA node is firing. The SA node is firing, and
it's firing on a regular basis so she has a normal Essay node. But then if you look at the QRS complex, there's a P wave followed by a QRS here,
but then we have a P which is
not followed by the QRS. And then we have another P,
which again is not followed by PRS, and that the R to R intervals are actually
longer than the P to P intervals. So the R to R ntervals are regular, but
they are at a much longer interval. Which means that they have
a different pace maker. So we've somehow uncoupled the electrical
activity that's occurring in the atria from the electrical activity that's
occurring in the ventricle and this particular heart, and what that is is
there's a complete block at the A/V node, so the A/V node then is not taking
the information and listening to the pace which is being set by the essay
node, but instead the atria are then contracting at one pace, but
the ventricles at a much slower pace. So the new pacemaker is a pacemaker
that's giving her 30 beats per minute, and that new pacemaker then would be
the His bundle, or the purkinjes. Okay, so one of our key concepts. So the first is, each heart beat, or
one cardiac cycle, involves electrical activation of the atria and the ventricles
in the right and the left chambers. Secondly, that the action potential of
the pacemaker and the contractile cells, they're both cardiac myocytes but their
action potentials are very different. The pacemakers, the time of the action
potential is 150 milliseconds and we have an unstable resting
membrane potential. And in the cardiac myocyte
that's contractile, the time of the action potential is
200 to 220 milliseconds, and there is a stable
resting membrane potential. The pacemaker cells then have these
unstable resting membrane potential. The SA node is the fastest
pacemaker in the heart, and in the normal heart, it sets the beat. So all the other pacemakers
are trained by the SA node. Fourth, our heart rate is determined
by the autonomic nervous system. The sympathetic nervous system increases
heart rate, it speeds up heart rate, and it's acting through the beta
one adrenergic detectors. The parasympathetic is what slows the
heart rate, it's the brake for the system. And it's acting through the vagus
innervation or vagal innervation. And it is through the muscarinic
innervation which are present in the heart. Five, the electrocardiogram is
the sum of the electrical activity of the entire heart. The P waves depicts
the atrial depolarization. The QRS complex depicts
the ventricular depolarization. And the T wave is
the ventricular repolarization. And six, disease of
the electrical conduction system can be manifested by changes in
the electrocardiogram itself. So both the timing and whether or
not a specific wave is occurring, tells the cardiologist something
that's what may be part of the disease process that's occurring
within the electrical conduction system. Okay, so the next time we come in. And we're gonna talk about how
this electrical conduction system coordinates the contractal
activities of the heart. Okay, so, see you then.