Greetings! So today we're gonna talk
about the heart as a pump, so we want to consider how
it generates pressure and how by generating pressure it's able to
move blood in a unidirectional manner. So it distributes blood to the lung and it can also distribute blood
to the systemic circulation. To do this we'll first
consider the structure and the function of the heart chambers and
their associated valves. And then secondly, we want to talk about
what's called systole and diastole. And systole is the time when
the heart is contracting and generating pressure,
an ejection of the blood. And diastole is when the heart muscle
is relaxing that the valves open and the heart fills with blood. The third,
we want to explain the cardiac cycle and that is the set you have one systole and
one diastole. And that's one cardiac cycle and
that's one heartbeat. And, we want talk about
the associated heart sounds. And, those are those sounds that you heard
from the stethoscope which is the lub dub. [SOUND] And then fourth we want to talk
about what's known as the pressure volume loops, the stroke volume and
the cardiac output and these are ways in which we can address
how well the heart is functioning. So it gives us some assessment tools for
seeing how well the heart is acting. So let's get started, so the first thing
is as you recall the last time we met. We said that the heart has
a right side and a left side and that on both sides, the right and
the left, there are two chambers, the upper chamber is called an atrium and
the lower chamber the ventricle. We have a right atrium and a right
ventricle and we have a left atrium, which is shown here,
and the left ventricle. And between the atria and the ventricles, at the base of the heart,
we said there was the cardiac skeleton. And within this cardiac skeleton,
there are valves. And there are four valves. We have two atrioventricular valves,
one on the right, and one on the left. And then we have two other valves, one which is called the pulmonary valve,
pulmonic valve. This pulmonic valve allows blood to be
move from the right ventricle to the lung, through the pulmonary artery. And the other valve is
called the aortic valve. And then the aortic valve allows
blood to move from the left ventricle out to the aorta which is a large
blood vessel which distributes blood to the rest of the body. So the things to remember then is
that we have these two chambers. And that the two chambers are going
to move in a concerted manner. So, we have blood moving in
a unidirectional manner from one side, the right side, to the left side. And the amount of blood that moves
from the right side to the lung. Is the amount of blood that returns
from the lung into the left ventricle. So these two chambers then right in the
left side of the heart are in series and so the amount that's ejected from
the right has to be equal to the amount which is ejected from the left. The other thing that we should keep in
mind and that is, is that on the right side, the walls of the heart are fairly
thin relative to the left side and this is because on the right side of the heart,
we are not generating as high pressures. Because the system that's downstream,
that's into the lung, removing blood into the lung,
does not have a high resistance. It's a low pressure system. So the right atrium generates about
ten millimeters of mercury when it's contracting, and the right ventricle, 25
millimeters of mercury when it contracts. The left atrium generates 15 millimeters
of mercury when it contracts, and the left ventricle 120 millimeters
of mercury when it contracts. So therefore, the left ventricle then is generating the
most pressure within the entire system. And it has the thickest walls,
it is the chamber with the thickest walls. One other point to remember, and that is, is that the blood is moving from
the ventricles out through the valves, and the valves are located
at the base of the heart. And so when the heart is contracting,
the blood will move in this direction. So first, we have blood entering into
the right chamber, into the right atrium. We'll move into the right ventricle, out through the pulmonic artery and
into the lung. And it goes out through the pulmonary
valve, or pulmonic valve. And then it returns from
the lung to our left atrium. When it enters into the left atrium
it moves through the AV valves, that's the atrioventricular valve,
and into the left ventricle. And then from the left ventricle
out through the aortic valve and into the aorta and
out to the rest of the body. So unidirectional movement
of blood through the system. The valves are interposed between
the chambers to prevent back flow and this is what we see on this next slide. So we have the four cardiac valves and
they're to prevent back flow so we want to always have movement of
blood going from atria to ventricle. And from the right side of the heart
going to the left side of the heart. The pulmonary and
aortic valves prevent back flow from the arteries when the ventricles
are relaxing and they have low pressure. The valves in general are going
to open and close due to changes in pressure across the valves,
and that's true for all of the valves. So when there's a pressure
difference between the two chambers, say for instance, the atrium has a higher pressure than the
ventricle, then the AV valve will open. When the ventricle has a higher pressure
than the atrium, then the AV valve closes. Okay, and the same is true for the aortic
valve and through the pulmonic valve. The AV valves are the ones which
experience the highest pressure, so these are the valves which are closed
when the ventricles are contracting. And so those valves have an unusual
structure attached to them and these are chordae tendineae, and
that's shown here on this diagram. They look like strings in
this particular diagram. But they are tendons which
are attaching those valves to the papillary muscles
of the ventricles. And it's to prevent
the valves from everting and allowing the blood to flow backwards
from the ventricle into the atria as the ventricles are generating pressure. So unidirectional flow through the valves,
and the valves close and open depending upon
a change in pressure across the valves. All right so
let's consider our cardiac cycle. So as I said to you, the cardiac
cycle consists of two portions. One is called systole, and this would
be when the heart is filled with blood, and it then starts to contract and will eject the increase Increases
pressure and will eject blood. The second is called diastole, and
diastole is when the heart is relaxing, the muscle is relaxing, and
now the heart will fill with blood. Diastole is actually
longer in a time period than systole in a given cardiac cycle. But one cardiac cycle has one systole and
one diastole. So let's start the cardiac cycle
where the ventricles are relaxed, the AV valves are open, and
the ventricle is filling passively. This is passive filling
because the pressure that's in the atrial is higher than
the pressure in the ventricle. So blood is passively flowing into
the ventricle, the ventricle is filling. We now have an electrical event
occurring and that's our P-wave. So the P-wave simply is
a depolarization of the atria and when that occurs the atria
will contract and as the atria contract the pressure in
the atria increase and that expels a last little bit of about 20 to 30% of
the blood volume into the ventricle. The ventricle now has a higher pressure
than the atria and the valve closes. So the atrioventricular valves will close. So the AV valve closes. At this point in time,
we have a second electrical event, and that's called the QRS. The QRS, as you recall, the QRS complex,
is when there is a depolarization of the ventricles and following
depolarization of the ventricles, we'll have contraction of the ventricles. And as the ventricles contract, they will increase pressure because now
all the valves are closed and so the blood that's within those chambers is isolated
and as the chamber volume gets smaller, pressure will increase on the liquid or
the blood that's within the chamber. So isovolumic contractions simply
means all valves are closed and pressure is increasing. Pressure eventually increases to where the
aortic valve and obviously the pulmonic valves will open, and once that occurs,
then the ventricles continue to contract, pressure is continuing to increase and
we have ejection of blood. Now as the the blood leaves the ventricle,
the pressure within the ventricles drops, and as it drops then it becomes less
than the pressure that's in the aorta or less than the pressure that's
in the pulmonary artery. And at this point, the valves will close. So then we have all valves are closed,
and this is where we have now, pressure is falling. And it is isovolumic,
all the valves are closed and the volume that's within
the heart chamber is isolated. On the electrocardiogram,
we have the T wave occurring. The T wave indicates the relaxation or depolarization of the cardiac myocytes,
and following depolarization, we have relaxation of the cardiac myocyte. And as they relax, the volume of
the ventricle increases, pressure within the ventricle will decrease and eventually
the pressure within the ventricles now will be less than the pressure in
the atria and the AV valves will open. So during the time of isovolumic
relaxation, all the valves are closed. The ventricle is relaxing,
and the pressure is falling. There is a very complicated way
of looking at the ECG changes, changes in the pressure within the left
ventricle, and changes with volume within the left ventricle as well
as the sounds that you hear. With the heart sounds that you hear and
that's what's diagrammed on this particular chart and
this chart is called the Wigger's diagram. So if you understand Wigger's diagram then
you understand completely the cardiac cycle. So let's just go through
it fairly rapidly and that is is that this is only
pertains to the left ventricle. And then I'll go through
it very quickly and then I'll allow you to sort of come
back and look at this because, as I say, if you study this and understand this then
you will understand everything that's happening in the heart
during a cardiac cycle. So if you notice at the bottom we
have our electrocardiogram and at the top we have
the ventricular pressure. And that is the pressure which
is in the left ventricle. So that's the blue line. So we're going to follow this blue line,
which is pressure over time. So this is time. And the first thing that we
notice is that we have a P-wave. And following the P-wave, the passive feeling that's occurring
in the ventricle increases. And we have this sort of last little push,
a last little pressure increase, and that causes closure of the AV valves. Once the AV valve closes, the heart now, all the chambers of
the heart are isolated. And at this point, we have the QRS. The QRS occurs when you
start to get contraction. And as you have contraction
in an isovolumic condition, the pressure rises, and
that's what's shown here. Until the pressure exceeds
that of what's in the aorta. And that then causes the opening
of the aortic valve and as the aortic valve opens,
we have an ejection of blood. So the blood is now leaving the heart and
entering into the aorta. Pressure continues to rise simply
because we still have contraction of the ventricle, but
eventually we have a T wave and when the T wave occurs that
causes the ventricles to relax. So at that point pressure falls within the
ventricle because enough blood has left. The aortic valve closes. A T wave occurs. We have relaxation of the muscle. And as we have relaxation of
the ventricles, then the pressure falls. And this is an isovolumic relaxation. And that's what's shown here. The end of isovolumic relaxation,
the pressure now is less than what's in the atria and the AV valve
opens and we again start to fill. So if you notice,
while we isovolumic contraction to isovolumic relaxation,
this is called systole. So we have the isovolumic contraction and
ejection, systole. And then when we start the isovolumic
relaxation and eventually, filling, that's the diastole. So that's what's shown at
the bottom of the plot. The other thing that's added to
this plot are the heart sounds. So the first of the heart sounds is what's
shown here, and the first heart sound occurs after you close the AV valves, and
this is called the lub, of the lub dub. Lub dub. So, the lub is when you
close all of the AV valves. And so now, all of the valves are shut,
and that isolates the ventricles. By closing the AV valve, the blood
which is moving into the ventricle, then sloshes back up against the valve. [SOUND] And you hear that
slamming up against the valve. And that's what causes the first sound. So the first heart sound is closure of the
AV valve, and the beginning of systole. The second heart sound occurs when you
have closure of the aortic valve, and as you close the aortic valve, again, the
blood can slosh back up against the valve. And you hear this [SOUND]
sloshing against the valve. And that's the second sound. The first sound's lub,
second sound is dub. So, you have lub dub lub dub. And that's one heartbeat or
one cardiac cycle. So for every lub dub,
that's one cardiac cycle. In a person at rest,
you have 60 beats per minute, so you have 60 of these cardiac
cycles occurring every minute. If you start running and
your heart rate increases to 180, then you have 180 of these cardiac
cycles occurring per minute. And there's another way of
looking at the chances that occurring within the ventricles, and
this is called the pressure volume loops. So we diagram the pressure on
the y-axis versus the volume. And again,
we're only looking at the left ventricle. Let's only consider the black circle or the black loop,
which is the A, B, C, D loop. So if we start at A, and
the left ventricle has 50 millilitres volume of blood in it. And as you go from A to B then
the volume increases to 90 millilitres. So A, B is filling,
passive filling, of the ventricle. At B, now the ventricle has enough
pressure that it closes the valve and so once the valve closes we now have
the end of diastole, the end of filling, and at that point, we would now have
isovolumic contraction occurring. So isovolumic contraction is from B to C. And we're increasing pressure, but there's
no change in volume within the ventricle. At C, the aortic valve opens because we've
exceeded the pressure that's in the aorta. The aortic valve opens. We continue to have pressure building up
within the ventricle because there's still contraction of the ventricle. And that causes ejection of the blood, which is a loss of volume
within the left ventricle. And we proceed from C to D, so
this is ejection of the blood. When we reach D, then the ventricle has
less pressure than in the aorta and the aortic valve closes. Now we have isovolumic condition where all of the volume that's within
the left ventricle is constant. And the ventricle relaxes. So between D to A,
we have isovolumic relaxation and pressure falls but the volume does
not change within the chamber. So a couple things to notice. So at B,
B is called the end diastolic volume. And the end diastolic volume
is the amount of volume that's present within the heart
as it starts systoling. At D, this D is called the end systolic
volume, and the end systolic volume, then, is the amount that's left within the heart
after we've had an ejection of blood. So if you notice, the heart's never empty,
there's not a vacuum within the heart. There's blood within the heart,
and under this condition, there's 50 millilitres present at end
diastolic volume, end systolic volume. The difference between end diastolic
volume, that is the filled volume, and systolic volume, the volume after
ejection, is called stroke volume, so that's the amount of blood that's
been ejected from the heart. So end diastolic volume minus end systolic
volume is equal to stroke volume, and in this case, it would be 90
millilitres minus 50 millilitres, or 40 millilitres would
be our stroke volume. So, we are interested in
the end-diastolic volume because it tells us how much volume is present within
the heart, how big the heart is. And we're gonna return to end-diastolic
volume, stroke volume again and systolic volume again
in the later lectures. But given today, we'll just say that
the end-diastolic volume in each ventricle is normally about 125 milliliters and
during one systole, the volume of blood that's ejected, or the stroke
volume is usually about 70 millilitres. So since not all of the blood then
is ejected from the ventricle, only part of the blood that's been
filled into the ventricle is ejected, the volume that's remaining is
that end-systolic volume and this is usually 55 millilitres and
that's what's shown here so we have. So we have end the SV = EDV- ESV. Now the cardiac output is the amount
of blood that the heart is giving to provide enough oxygen for all the tissues. And cardiac output has to vary depending
upon the demands of the tissues of the body. The cardiac output is the volume
which is pumped per minute and it depends on both the heart rate and
on the stroke volume. So the cardiac output is equal to
stroke volume times heart rate, and we said that the heart rate was
typically about 72 beats per minute, and the stroke volume is about 70 beats,
70 millimeters and so that means that the cardiac output
is about five liters per minute. Now if you recall in our athlete, we said that the athlete could
have a very low heart rate. This resting heart rate could be
something like 35 or 50 beats per minute. But his cardiac output is about the same. His cardiac output is around 5 L/min. So how is he able to cope with having
a cardiac output of 5 L/min and a heart rate that's only lets
say 50 beats per minute. And the way that he copes is that the
cardiac output is equal to stroke volume times heart rate. If the heart rate is 50, and
the cardiac output is 5000 millileters per minute, this is 50 milliliters. Then the stroke volume is the cardiac
output divided by heart rate. So in this particular case, then,
we'd have 5,000 divided by 50. Or 100. So the stroke volume is equal to 100. And we said that a normal person and that the stroke volume is about
70 milliliters per minutes but in the trained athlete who has a lower
heart rate, he has a larger stroke volume. And what happens with training is
that the heart becomes stronger, the walls of the heart become. Thicker and
the chambers can become a little larger. The heart grows and becomes stronger
because it has to meet the demands of whatever the athletic event is. So they compensate by having
a larger stroke of volume but they have a lower heart rate. And this is an advantage. So that when they start, let's say 50
beats per minute and they end up at 200 beats per minute, which is the maximum
heart rate that the fellow can have. So that he's able to still fill the heart
because of the heart rate is too fast, you're unable to fill
the heart adequately. If it starts with a 50 beats per
minute and a large stroke volume then you can move up to 200 beats per minute
and be able to have a much larger ability to change, or to vary his
heart rate, or his cardiac output. Then say I would, where I start with 80 beats per minute
in a much smaller stroke volume. And again, I end up with 200 beats
per minute as my maximum heart rate. But I have a shorter period for
movement of my cardiac output. All right, so,
what are the key concepts then? So, the heart consists
of two separate pumps. Blood moves in a unidirectional manner
from the right heart to the lung for gas exchange,
then returns to the left heart from which it is pumped to the systemic
circulation for delivery to tissues. Secondly, each beat of the heart
that's our cardiac cycle starts with an electrical evacuation
of the atria and then of the ventricle. And the sequence is the same on
the right side of the heart as it is on the left heart. And thirdly,
we have the ventricular contraction and ejection occurs during systole and
beginning of systole coincides with the first heart sound and
ends with the second heart sound. So the first heart sound, we're closing
the AV valves, the heart is full. And the second heart sound where
we are closing the aortic and pulmonic valve, because the heart
now is starting to relax and pressure is lower than what's downstream. Fourth, the ventricles relax and
fill during diastole. And diastole begins with that second heart
sound and ends with the first heart sound. So diastole is when the muscle is
relaxing, pressure is falling and we have passive filling with blood. Next we have the volume of
blood that's ejected with each beat is called the stroke volume and that the sum of the stroke volume ejected
in one minute is our cardiac output. Okay, so the next time you come
in we're going to consider the cardiovascular system in more
detail so I'll see you then.