Welcome back.
So now we've talked about signaling
along the length of neurons. We've talked about signaling along
dendrites and cell bodies, which are gonna be using graded potentials, and then along
the length of axons there's going to be action potentials that are gonna be used
to communicate along the length of axons. Keep in mind too,
that neurons can be very long cells. So for instance, the axons that
control the muscles in your foot have their cell bodies sitting
in your spinal cord and then they send an axon all the way down
to your foot to intervate the muscle. And so the action potential is gonna
have to travel all the way down your leg along that axon to control your muscle. So that gives you a sense for how quickly these action potentials
have to move down the axon to be useful. So now what we want to talk about is focused more on communication
between neurons. And so
that's what this session will be about. And that's going to be accomplished in
large part through chemical synapses, which we've talked a little
bit about already. Where you're gonna have the terminus
of an axon, the end of an axon, that's going to synapse
with some other cell. Synapse meaning that it gets very, very
close to it, but they don't quite touch. And the downstream cell or what we call the postsynaptic cell,
could be another neuron certainly. It could be a muscle cell. It could be a a cell from another organ. That doesn't matter. The idea is that the two cells
come very close to one another. The action potential, we already know, is gonna travel down the axon and
come to this terminus. And in the end of the axon we have
voltage gated calcium channels and so that action potential is
gonna cause them to open. And that's gonna let calcium
enter the axon terminus, and that calcium is gonna act as a signal
that allows vesicles that are full of neurotransmitter to fuse with the plasma membrane, and dump out here
into what we call the synaptic cleft. So this is where the nervous system's
very similar to the endocrine system. The endocrine system is gonna
release hormones into the blood and here the nervous system is gonna release
neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft. However you know that the hormones
that get dumped into the blood, they're gonna have to travel all
the way through the body and diffuse throughout the body
to get to their targets. That's gonna take some time. Where here, we have a very small distance
that the neurotransmitter has to diffuse and it's gonna be released in really
large quantities into this small space, whereas we know endocrine
hormones are gonna become very dilute once they're put
into the circulation. So, that's gonna make
the chemical synapse very rapid. So tons of neurotransmitter
is going to get released into the synaptic cleft and
then it's going to bind specific receptors which can often be
ligand gated ion channels. And we'll talk about some
more other specific examples. That's gonna cause some sort of
change in the downstream cell. If the downstream cell is a neuron and
those our ligand gated channels then we're gonna cause a graded potential
in this downstream postsynaptic cell. Another thing to keep in mind, is that
then very often this synapse is gonna have some way of terminating
the signal by, for instance, degrading the neurotransmitter
that's in the synaptic cleft, or taking it back up into the axon terminus. Some way of getting rid of that
neurotransmitter, so that if signalling happens again, causing another
response in the postsynaptic cell. So this again comes to the same figure
that we've talked about before, where we can have excitatory or
inhibitory synapses. And an excitatory synapses is
gonna be one that causes a deep polarization of the membrane
in that postsynaptic cell. And we call that
an Excitatory Postsynaptic Potential. It's just a fancy name,
but it kinda makes sense, that's gonna be a graded depolarization,
that's what synapses 1 and 2 are causing. And that's often gonna be due
to an influx of positive ions. Opening sodium channels,
sodium will rush in. Then we can also always, we've already
discussed, have an Inhibitory postsynaptic potential, when we cause
a graded hyperpolarization, as was seen with synapse number 3. And that's going to be due to
either influx of negative ions, or like chloride or
an influx of positive ions like potassium. And so we've already talked about how
these are gonna be graded potentials and that they're going to be additive. Another thing that we need to consider is,
the fact that these, that neurons can form different types of networks, so that
we can have systems that are divergent, which means that one neuron can
control several downstream neurons. And this would be useful if you
wanted to amplify a signal or if you want to control several
different cells or processes. Or you can have convergent
neuronal networks, which is when several neurons
give inputs to a single neuron. So this would be an example when this
downstream neuron is getting inputs and it's summoning these graded
potentials to decide whether or not to fire an action potential. So we'll be talking about these
more further in the course but just to give you an idea
of the power of this, of these neuronal networks, and of these inhibitory and
excitatory synapses. We're gonna talk a little bit
about lateral inhibition, which is this idea of neurons
inhibiting their neighbors, and what that can allow us to do when we're
trying to perceive what's happening. In this case when something like
a pencil is touching our skin. So if you touch a pencil
to your fingertip, you'll see that it makes big depression
all around the tip of the pencil. But yet when you don't look even,
you can sense that it is a point that's touching your skin,
not something like an eraser. And so the way that your body
allows you to sense that is through lateral inhibition. So this is what's shown here, where
we've got this point touching the skin. It's mostly activating
this second neuron but it's also activating the sensory touch
receptor neurons 1 and 3 as well. So without lateral inhibition
we would get this yellow curve, where we have neuron 2 excited the most,
and 1 and 3 excited less. And the way that they're gonna
convey how excited they are, is by action potential frequency. So since 2 is being activated a lot, it's
firing action potentials very rapidly. Versus 1 and 3, which are firing
action potentials less frequently. However, what we actually perceive after we've had this lateral inhibition happen, is this second situation,
where 2 is still activated but 1 and 3 are fairly highly inhibited. And that actually changes
the action potential frequency, such that 2 is still firing
fairly rapidly, but 1 and 3 are firing much less rapidly, and
that's what allows us to really feel the point of the pencil and kind of
ignore the depressed skin around it. And that's what lets us know that it's
something pointy on our finger and not something more dull. The circuitry that allows us
to do that is shown here at the bottom of the slide with these yellow
arrows showing the inputs coming in. And then we have these divergent and
convergent networks happening, where the red neurons
are the inhibitory neurons. And so you can see that each neuron
is going to inhibit it's neighbors. So this middle neuron,
neuron 2 is going to inhibit both 1 and 3, and 1 is gonna inhibit 2,
and 3's gonna inhibit 2. But, since 2 is being activated so
much, it's going to inhibit 1 and 3 much more, and that's what
results in this middle graph and these action potential frequency,
where what has happened is the contrast between
the action potential frequency of 2 and neurons 1 and 3, has increased and
that's what allows us to feel the point. So I'm not so concerned that you
understand lateral inhibition and the details of it, but I just want
to give you a concrete example of how these networks can act to accomplish something that
the nervous system requires. Give you a hardcore,
a real concrete example of this. We're gonna finish up just talking about
a couple of specific types of synapses. One to just give you a better sense of
what's actually happening with synapses. And two, because you're gonna
hear about these synapses all throughout the rest of the course
because they're gonna be involved in controlling the organs
that we're gonna study. So, one type are Cholinergic Synapses,
named because in those synapses that presynaptic cell is releasing
Acetylcholine as a neurotransmitter. On the postsynaptic cell, there are two
types of receptors that can be present, one are nicotinic-ligand
gated ion channels. They're nicotinic acetylcholine receptors,
which are like liangated sodium channels. And nicotinic receptors are found on
skeletal muscle and in the brain. Or you can have acetylcholine
receptors that are musarinic, which are instead of being
Ligand gated ion channels, they're G protein coupled receptors,
which will bind the acetylcholine and then come start some sort of signal
transduction cascade that will lead to changes in ion channels or other changes
in the cells that will cause the effect. So muscarinic receptors
are found on the heart, smooth muscle, glands,
and also in the brain. Another type of really important
synapse are the Adrenergic Synapses, which are ones that
release catecholamines, which are neurotransmitters like
norepinephrine and epinephrine. Epinephrine which is the same
thing as adrenaline, that's why they're called
adrenergic synapses. Again, we can have different types of
receptors on the postsynaptic cell, alpha or beta adrenergic receptors. And there's different types of those,
and we'll be getting into that in different tissue and organ types,
which adrenergic receptors are expressed. And again, these are G protein
coupled receptors that are gonna act through second messenger systems and
they're gonna be present on our blood vessels,
in the airways of our lungs, the heart, smooth muscle glands, very prevalent
receptors and synapse types. So, we've talked about
graded potentials and how those are going to be summed
throughout the neuron and how then we're gonna be able to communicate
using synapses between neurons. And how that transmission
of information across the synapses is gonna be very quick and very efficient in it's effects
on the postsynaptic cell.