Hello, I'm Jennifer Carbrey, I'm a faculty
member in the cell biology department at Duke, and I'm going to give you several
lectures about the nervous system. We're going to start off talking
about some of the cell types and one of the main cell types that I'm
sure you're familiar with are neurons. And that's actually what's
shown in this title slide, where we have a microscopic
image of a neuron cell body that's darkly stained
with a light nucleus in the center. So we'll be talking mostly
about neurons in this section. We'll also talk a little
about glial cells. Then, in future sessions, we're gonna
talk about how these cells communicate, how neurons communicate. So keep in mind, you've already heard
some about the endocrine system from Dr. Jacoy where it's responding
to stimuli in a slow manner. And based on the stimuli that it's
responding to that's perfectly fine. That works just well. However with the nervous system, a lot of what it's going to be responding
to needs to be responded to very quickly. So if you put your hand on a hot stove,
you need to remove it quickly and you also need to sense the heat quickly. If something's flying at you, you need
to be able to see it and duck quickly. And so,
a lot of what we're gonna be talking about is how this can be accomplished,
the speed and very specificity of the nervous system and
how that can be achieved. And then at the end we'll put together
how these neurons come together and are organized to get these tasks done. So we're gonna start off
talking about neurons, and neurons have different parts to them. They can have very different morphologies,
but a typical one is they're gonna have
a cell body, which is kind of the main portion of the neuron that's gonna contain
the nucleus and a lot of the organelles. And then coming off of that cell body
are going to be cell processes called dendrites, that are going
to receive information and there can be thousands of them on neurons. So there can be many, many dendrites
that are all receiving information and we'll learn more about how that happens. And then often a neuron is
going to have a single axon, which you can remember since
axon starts with an A, it is usually taking information away
from the cell body of the neuron. So often it has a single axon
that's taking information away from the cell body and
where the axon meets the cell body is called the initial segment of the axon and
in future sessions, we'll talk about the significance
of the initial segment of the axon. And then, often, the axon can
branch to form different terminals. And we'll be talking about those
in future sessions, as well. So, then there's only a few
other types of supporting cells, that are called glial cells,
that we're gonna talk about. So one type of glial
cells are Schwann cells, which are found in
the peripheral nervous system. So this is going to be in
the parts of the nervous system like nerves and
ganglia that are outside of the central nervous system which consists of
the brain and the spinal cord. So these Schwann cells
are there to support more specifically the axons of neurons. And what they do is they form this
extension of specialized membrane and they wrap and wrap and
wrap around a specific segment of an axon. So each one of these blue structures is a separate Schwann cell that's wrapping
around that portion of the axon and they leave little spaces
between themselves and we'll talk about the significance
of that in future sessions. So, here's kind of a close-up, where you
can see the Schwann cell nucleus and the Schwann cell wrapping and
wrapping around the axon, and that's acting to electrically
insulate that portion of the axon. So the schwann cells are the cells are the
cells that myelinate in the peripheral nervous system, and then in the central
nervous system we have oligodendrocytes which are the glial cells that myelinate
neurons in the central nervous system. They use a very similar
process of wrapping and wrapping around a section of axon. However, these cells
are a little different, because oligodendrocytes send
out several processes each one myelinating a different
segment of an axon or axons. Okay? And that's what's shown in this diagram
where we have the oligodendrocyte cell body and it's sending out
several processes that each myelinate a different segment of axon. But the idea is the same, to electrically
insulate that portion of axon and we'll talk about in future sessions
why that's going to be important. So most of the information on this
slide we've already talked about. How in the peripheral nervous system
we have Schwann cells that myelinate. In the central nervous system
that's oligodendrocytes. And then there's just a couple
other cell types I wanna mention. One are microglial cells which are immune
cells of the central nervous system. And then another really important cell
type that we're not gonna talk much about, but it's becoming increasingly
clear that they're very important in supporting neurons,
and these are astrocytes. They support neurons metabolically, they maintain the extra cellular environment
of the neurons, and they're important in processes such as synapse formation,
which is when two neurons come together. So even though we're not going to
really say any more about them, keep in mind that astrocytes
are crucial parts of the central nervous system
in order to support neurons. So this is the end of our first video
where we talked about neurons and glia cells. Neurons are gonna be the cells that
are gonna transmit the information. And we're gonna talk about how that's
going to happen in the next few sessions. And then glia cells are going
to be what provide support to neurons in multiple different ways.