Hello. Welcome to our second session
about the nervous system. We're gonna talk about
membrane potentials. So, membrane potentials
are gonna be changes or differences in the amount of charge on
either side of the membrane of cells, and in particular,
we're gonna talk about neurons. And this is gonna be our
first introduction into the method of communication
in the nervous system. So, Dr. Dacoy has already talked to you
about the electrochemical gradient. So, these are going to being chemical
gradients of electrically charged molecules, and she's told you how the
sodium potassium ATPase is going to be so important in establishing these gradients,
and we'll talk more about that later. And the whole point of this, our bodies spend a significant portion
of their ATP setting up this gradient, and they do it so that they can
harness it to do different jobs. So, sometimes they use the potential
energy that's in that gradient to help transport certain
substances across the membrane. We'll be hearing about that
in other organ systems. But the other thing it can do is
use this gradient to allow ions to flow across the membrane and form
a current that can be used in signaling. And so that's what we're gonna be talking
about for the next several minutes. So, one thing that you need to remember,
and you don't need to remember these concentrations
down here at the bottom of the slide. But what you do need to remember is that
the sodium potassium ATPase is going to make it so
that there's a larger concentration of sodium on the outside of the cell
compared to the inside of the cell. And there's much more potassium
on the inside of the cell compared to the outside of the cell. And we'll see in a few minutes
why this is really helpful. We've taken two different
positive ions and segregated them to two different
sides of the membrane, basically. And we'll see how that's advantageous. The other thing to keep in
mind is that in neurons and in many other cells of our body, when
those cells are at rest, there is what we call a negative membrane potential,
and that's what's shown right here. And what a negative membrane
potential refers to is the fact that there are more negative charges inside
the cell than outside of the cell. And so, we're gonna talk about that
in much greater detail as well. So, we've established that in
a normal cell, we're gonna have a lot more sodium on the outside and
a lot more potassium on the inside. That's what's shown here in a simplified
system on this slide, where, here, we have a 150 millimolar potassium
chloride on the inside of the cell and 150 millimolar sodium chloride
on the outside of the cell. Since these are potassium chloride and
sodium chloride, and we've got equal numbers of positive and negative
charges on each side of the membrane, right now, the membrane potential
equals zero millivolts. There's no charge difference
between the sides of the membrane. Also, you'll note in this figure that we
have some ion channels, which are these blue boxes, and there are several things
to keep in mind about ion channels. One is that they're specific. And so, these happen to be potassium
channels, which means that they're only going to transport potassium for all
intents and purposes, that really, sodium is not going to be able to go through
these channels in any perceivable manner. So they're specific for potassium and
they're going to be gated. This makes sense. If you spend ATP to segregate sodium and
potassium and to build this electrochemical gradient, you don't want
ion channels just sitting there, open and unregulated, and letting ions flow
down their concentration gradient. You want ion flow to be highly
regulated if you're gonna put so much energy into building the gradient. And so, these will be gated, and we'll be talking about the different
modalities that can gate these channels. Then the other thing to keep in mind
is that when the channels are open, they're bi-directional. Potassium's gonna be able to move in
either direction across these channels, depending on both the chemical
gradient that's present and the electrical gradient. So, in step 2, that's what's happening. We are opening a potassium channel. And as we do that,
we've got no electrical gradient, and we have a very large chemical gradient for
potassium. And so,
potassium is going to leave the cell. As soon as one potassium leaves,
then all of a sudden, we've got a excess of
negative charge on the inside of the cell versus the outside, and
we've got a negative membrane potential. Potassium is gonna continue to
diffuse through the channel, down its concentration gradient. So we're gonna get more and more positive
charges on the outside of the cell, and more negative membrane potential for
the cell, until finally, in step three, we've got enough positive
charges outside of the cell that now the electrical gradient is driving
some potassium back into the cell. So we've got more potassium leaving, but now some potassium's starting
to head in towards the cell. In step four,
we've got the same number of potassiums leaving the cell as we
have entering the cell. And that's when we have now reached
the equilibrium potential for potassium. So, we still have a very
large chemical gradient, even in step four, so
that the number of potassiums that have left to form this electrical
gradient is still very small. We still have a very large
chemical gradient, but we have a large enough electrical gradient
that it is opposing the chemical gradient. And so, the membrane potential,
at this state, in step four, is going to be positive, and it's going to be the equilibrium
potential for potassium. So, what that number is in millivolts,
it's going to be a negative number. I'm sorry, that's going to be
a negative membrane potential. And it's going to be based solely
on what the potassium concentration is on the inside of the cell
versus the outside of the cell. That's what's gonna determine
the millivolt number, that's gonna be negative, that is going to be
the equilibrium potential for potassium. So this is going to be,
we're gonna look at what this means for the cell in just a moment, but
you can think of it this way. If we have only potassium channels open,
and we have a certain concentration of potassium inside
the cell versus outside the cell, if you just open those potassium channels,
and those channels only, then the membrane potential will become
The equilibrium potential for potassium. So here's another way of looking at it
where we said at rest, our membrane potential is going to be negative,
which is what's shown right here. And we'll talk about why
that is in a minute. Now if we look at the case for sodium
in a normal cell, we said it's gonna have a much higher concentration of
sodium on the outside of the cell. And that means that if
we open sodium channels, sodium is going to want to enter
the cell based on its chemical gradient but also based on its electrical gradient. Because we said at rest we
have membrane potential. And so that means that if
we open sodium channels and let sodium keep entering the cell,
the chemical gradient is going to have sodium come in and the electrical,
until finally the inside of the cell is so positive that now sodium does
not want to enter the cell. Because of the electrical gradient,
it wants to leave. And so, we will get to a spot
which in a normal cell or in a neuron, is often about a positive
60 millivolts where there's so many positive charges inside the cell. The sodium still wants to come in because
it still has a chemical gradient, but it now also wants to leave because
the inside of the cell is so positive. And so at that point you've reached
the equilibrium potential for sodium if only sodium channels are open. We can look at the same case for potassium
which we have a little bit previously where we said it's gonna be more
concentrated on the inside of the cell which means our chemical gradient is
trying to get potassium to leave. But because our resting membrane
potential is negative when we first opened the potassium channels,
potassium wants to enter the cell. And so that means that if we open potassium channels and let the
cell come to the equilibrium potential for potassium, that's gonna
be at a negative membrane potential when we have opposing and equal forces from the chemical and
electrical gradient. So, basically, what the cell has done is
it's taken two different positive ions, put them on opposite
sides of the membrane so that they will have opposite charges for
their equilibrium potential. We'll see how that is gonna be harnessed
in order for the cell to signal. So we've now established what
an equilibrium potential is for a certain ion and that it's going to be
based on the concentration of the ion. But now we wanna talk about how resting
membrane potential is established. So, one thing we know is that we need to
establish the electrochemical gradient, and that the sodium potassium
ATPase is going to do that. And when it does that, it's going to move
three sodiums outside of the cell and bring in two potassiums inside the cell. So that's going to establish our gradient,
but you'll notice that is sending out three positive charges and only
bringing back in two positive charges. So the sodium potassium ATPase is
going to establish a little bit of a charge difference, which is going to
cause a little bit of a negative membrane potential because of that difference in
numbers of positive ions that it's moving. The other issue is what
channels are open at rest. So we said if only sodium channels are
open, then the membrane potential is gonna become the equilibrium potential for
sodium. If we open only potassium channels,
then the membrane potential is going to become the equilibrium
potential for potassium. If we open them up, sodium and
potassium channels, so that their membrane is permeable
equally to those two ions, then the membrane potential will reside in
between the two equilibrium potentials. So it will be proportional to
whichever ion is most permeable. And if the membrane is equally
permeable to sodium and potassium, then the membrane potential will reside
between their equilibrium potentials. In the case of at rest, we have the ATPase pump forming
the sodium and potassium gradients. But we also have leak channels, which are going to be ion channels that
are letting some ions through, and they're going to be determining what
the resting membrane potential is. So that we have a fair number
of potassium leak channels and fewer sodium leak channels. And so because we have a greater
permeability of the membrane to potassium, because we have more potassium ions
leaving through the leak channels then we have sodiums coming in through the sodium
leak channels, then that means our membrane potential at rest is much closer
to the equilibrium potential of potassium. Now if we had only
potassium leak channels, then the resting membrane potential would
be the equilibrium potential of potassium. But since we have a few sodium
leak channels operating, then the resting membrane potential
is just a little bit above the equilibrium potential for potassium. So it's another demonstration of- to
determine what the membrane potential will be at any certain time, you need to
know the concentrations of the ions, because those determine
the equilibrium potentials. And then you need to know
which ion channels are open, or how permeable the membrane
is to one ion versus the other. When we talk about membrane
potential changing, we have certain terms that we use. I'll be using them a lot so
this figure is to help you with that. When we're at resting membrane potential, we say that the cell is polarized
because there's a difference in charge across the membrane and
it happens to be more negative. So, at rest a cell is called polarized. If for instance we open sodium channels so
that sodium is going to rush in and our membrane potential is going to
increase and head towards the equilibrium potential for sodium,
then we say that the cell is depolarizing. It's becoming less polarized. The membrane potential is less negative. If it keeps going in that direction and
then the membrane potential becomes positive,
then you can call that an overshoot. If then we close the sodium channels, and
then open potassium channels, which means that the membrane potential is going to
head towards the equilibrium potential for potassium, then the membrane
potential will head toward zero, and then become more negative,
and that is called repolarizing. Because now,
the cell is becoming polarized again. If we keep those potassium channels open,
and then we go more negative than the resting membrane potential and
closer to the equilibrium potential for potassium, then the cell
is hyperpolarizing. It's becoming even more polarized. Than it is at rest, even more negative. So I'll be using these terms, so it's good
to become familiar with them because you will hear them a lot when anyone's talking
about changes in membrane potential. We're gonna finish up this section talking just a little bit about a type
of change in membrane potential. So it gets confusing I think because
we've talked about membrane potential, equilibrium potential. But what we're gonna start
talking about now are types of changes in membrane potential. And so this type that we're gonna
spend just this image talking about, are called graded potentials. They're called graded
because the amount of change in the membrane potential depends
on the strength of the stimulus. So it can be graded,
it can be a small change or large change, depending on the strength of the stimulus. I think the easiest thing to think about
when you're thinking about a graded potential is to imagine that you
have a ligand-gated ion channel. Meaning that it's gated
by binding a ligand, which is very often a molecule
like a neurotransmitter. So let's say we have in this image,
a sodium channel that's gated by a neurotransmitter, and it's sitting in
the membrane, and we add to that little spot in the membrane just the little
small amount of that neurotransmitter. So it's going to diffuse and
right where we added it, where it's most concentrated, it's going
to be able to bind to these sodium channels and open them,
which is going to cause sodium to rush, which is then going to cause a small
depolarization of the membrane. The membrane potential is going to
be less negative in that spot, and then as go you farther out from
that spot in the membrane, the change in the membrane potential
is going to be be less and less. The ligand,
the neurotransmitter is diffusing, and so its concentration is less. So it's going to be less likely
to open sodium channels. And then we have sodium rushing in at
this spot, they're going to diffuse, and so
their effect on the membrane potential and increasing it is going to decrease as you
go farther and farther from that site. So that's what's important to realize
about these graded potentials, is that they are going to decay
over space along the membrane, and over time as you've just put a little
pulse of that neurotransmitter, and everything's diffusing away and
then these ion channels close. Then as we've already mentioned
with graded potentials, if you give a greater stimulus,
then you're gonna have a bigger response. So you're going to add more
neurotransmitters the second time. It's gonna be a stronger stimulus. It's going to open more of these
ligand-gated sodium channels, let more sodium in,
cause a larger increase in the membrane potential and
affect the membrane farther out. And so that's what we see with this red
curve, where we have a bigger response. And so we'll see why these properties
of graded potentials are so important in the nervous system. But in our next session,we'll be talking
about a different type of change in the membrane potential which you're
probably familiar with, action potentials. So to sum up this session, we've talked about the equilibrium
potential of a certain ion, which is when the chemical gradient and the electrical
gradient are gonna be opposing each other. We talked about how the resting
membrane potential is established, how we need the sodium potassium ATPase
to make the gradients of the ions. And that we will have the potassium and
sodium leak channels that are also gonna be important
in establishing at what membrane potential our resting
membrane potential sits. However, if we inactivated
the sodium ATPase and we just let those leak channels
happen or if we let those function, then eventually we would dissipate
the resting membrane potential. It would become zero because we
would have no more sodium or potassium gradient without
the sodium potassium ATPase, so it's an extremely important
molecule in signaling. And then we finished up talking
about graded potentials, which are going to vary with
the strength of the stimulus, and they're going to decay over time and
space along the membrane.