Welcome back. This is our first on several videos
about the respiratory system. And so
we are going to start off talking about the general anatomy of the lung and
then some of the mechanics of breathing. How we get air in and out of our lung. Obviously, one of the main roles
of the respiratory system is to bring in oxygen, so
that we can do oxidative metabolism and then to remove the carbon
dioxide that we produce. However, we're also gonna be talking
about the very important role of the respiratory system
in regulating our pH. And then also keep in mind,
that because we're bringing in so many liters of air a day,
roughly 10,000 liters a day. And our lungs have such
a large surface area. That this is a major site of concern for
our defense system, for our immune system. And so, the respiratory system
is going to have certain strategies that it uses to
protect itself from pathogens. And that's something that we're
not really gonna focus on, but keep in mind that that is an important factor that the respiratory
system has to keep in mind. Now we're gonna see many similarities
of the respiratory system to the cardiovascular system. Because again,
we're gonna be talking about flow. And so, we're gonna be talking
about pressure gradients and the amplitude of that pressure gradient or
the amount of the pressure gradient is gonna be
important, as well as the resistance. And again, the resistance is gonna be
related to the radius of the tube and the radius is going to
be to the fourth power. So the radius is going to make
a huge difference in the resistance of the system. And again, we'll be addressing that
in similar ways that we did for the cardiovascular system. So just in a very low mag view of the
anatomy of the respiratory system where it's going to start with the nose and
the mouth, where air enters the body. And then, it's the air is gonna
enter the trachea which is gonna be a tube that is surrounded
by rings of cartilage. And then the trachea
will branch into bronchi. That are also surrounded by cartilage. And then those will
continue to branch more and more until we get to what's called
the respiratory part of the lung, which we'll be talking
about in the moment. And then keep in mind also, we're gonna
be talking about the diaphragm, which is gonna be sitting underneath the lungs
and which is going to be skeletal muscle. So we will be talking about
the respiratory system by dividing it into two parts. One is going to be the conducting part,
which is going to contain about 150 mls of air. And as its name suggests,
one of its main roles is to conduct or bring air into the main part of the lung
that is going to be responsible for exchanging gas with the blood. So that is certainly one of
the roles of the conducting portion of the respiratory system is to
distribute air into the rest of the lung. The conducting portion is
also going to warm and moisten the air, and we'll talk about that
a little bit more in future sessions. And it's also gonna have a major
role in cleansing the air. So again, this gets into the idea that
the lung has got to be concerned about all of these liters and liters of air that
it's bringing in, and so the conducting portion is going to cleanse the air using
what's called mucociliary transport. Which is going to be
when some cells lining the conducting portion, the trachea, and the bronchis are going to
be producing the mucus, and then that will trap debris. And then there will be other cells that
have cilia that then take that mucus, that it contains the debris, and beats it up towards the entryway
of the respiratory system. So that's the mucociliary
transport system, where we have mucus and
cilia that are gonna work together to remove particulate matter and
pathogens. The other aspect of the conducting system
is that in particular the bronchioles, very similar to the way the arterioles
controlled the flow through the system based on changing its diameter. The bronchioles are going to also
have smooth muscle around them which is going to help determine how easily
air flows into the lung through changing their amount of contraction or
relaxation of that smooth muscle. So those are the roles of
conducting portion of the system. Then the largest volume is going
to be in the respiratory portion of the respiratory tract, which is going
to be about three liters kind of at rest. Where we're gonna have gas exchange. And it's gonna be made up of alveoli
that have a very thin epithelium that allows for
diffusion of gases between the alveoli and the capillaries that are gonna receive and
dump off gases. So let's talk a little bit more
about the structure of the alveoli. So in this diagram,
we have three alveolar sacs. So each one of these structures
would be an alveolar sac and you can see that it's a spherical
structure that is then made up of smaller spheres and each of these
smaller spheres is an alveolis. So, the alveolar sac is made up
of lots of different alveoli, and the inner surface of these alveoli
is what's in contact with the air. And then you can see how the outer
surface is just covered in capillaries. The inner surface of the alveoli
makes up a large surface area, so it's about 70 square meters in the
lungs, which is obviously gonna allow for a lot of gas exchanges since
we have a large surface area. And that surface is going to be
comprised mostly of type one cells that are gonna make the surface of the
alveoli that is in contact with the air. And these cells are going
to be very flat cells. So they're gonna be the epithelial
cells of the alveoli. They are very flat and thin so that the air does not have to go a very
long distance to cross the type one cells. In between the type one cells will be
type two cells that don't cover as much of the surface
area of the alveoli but they're there as stem cells and
as cells that produce surfactants and we'll be talking more about
surfactant in the future. So you can see how we have
this thin epithelium and then lots of capillaries
on the other side of it to exchange the gas between the air and
the blood. We're gonna move now to talking a little
bit more about ventilation, and how we get air in and out of our lungs. And it's gonna be really important to
remember that the way that we get air into our lungs is called negative
pressure breathing. So basically, what we're going to do
is we are going to take our diaphragm, which is a dome shaped muscle,
and contract it. And so, its skeletal muscle and
if you contract it, that's going to make it shorter and
it's gonna become flatter. So as it becomes flatter then that is gonna cause the chest wall to expand. And as that chest wall expands then that's
gonna lower the pressure in the lungs. So you have negative
pressure in the lungs and that means that air is
gonna flow into the lungs. So the diaphragm is what's
going to be very important when we're just doing normal
activities like sitting and watching me lecture where
your somewhat at rest. You're going to contract your diaphragm
to inhale, and then you're just gonna relax your diaphragm to exhale and
we'll be talking more about this. But if for instance, you're exercising,
you're gonna want to take a deeper breath and you're gonna
want to breathe more quickly and that's when you can bring in muscles
of the rib cage, they're gonna kind of lift the ribs kind of like
a handle on a bucket and you lift it. And that's gonna increase
again the volume in the lungs. And then you can also use when
you're trying to exhale quickly, many other muscles of the chest wall,
as well as the abdomen. So, depending on the type
of breathing you're doing, you might use more muscles,
but very often just in normal, rest breathing,
you're using primarily the diaphragm. The other thing that to keep in mind and
we'll be talking much more about this is the reason why you can kind
of just relax your diaphragm and everything just compresses, the chest wall gets smaller on its own, is
because of the elastic recoil of the lung. That makes the lung want to get
smaller and that's what helps and that passive exhalation process. And we'll be talking more
about that in future sessions. So here's another view of this
where if we contract the diaphragm, we're going to expand the chest wall,
that's going to because of Boyle's law caused the pressure
in the lung to go down. And that means that we're gonna have
a greater pressure out in the atmosphere, and that means that air is gonna flow in. So that's inhalation. Negative pressure breathing, and
air is gonna enter when the pressure outside in the atmosphere is greater
than the pressure in the alveoli. So, PA refers to
the pressure in the alveoli. We're gonna be using this abbreviation
a lot, so it's good to get used to it. When you inhale, and then you often
kind of pause before you exhale, then very rapidly,
the pressure will equilibrate between the alveolar pressure and the atmosphere
pressure, and so flow will become 0. So in between breaths, that's what's
going to happen under most circumstances. When we expire, then that's gonna be
usually passive under normal conditions. And that's just when the thoracic cavity,
the chest wall and the lung are gonna return
to their normal dimensions. And as that happens, so
the diaphragm is gonna become dome shaped, as it relaxes, that's gonna
increase the pressure in the lungs. And that will make it's pressure
greater than atmosphere pressure and so air will flow out. So that's what's here where air leaves
when the atmospheric pressure is less than the alveolar pressure. So let's talk about ventilation, which
is gonna be this exchange of air between the atmosphere and the lungs and we can
talk about a ventilation cycle which is gonna be one inhalation and
one exhalation. And we'll be talking some about
the frequency of ventilation. How many breaths per
minute are you taking? Often it's gonna be between
10 to 18 breath a minute. We'll also be talking about
tidal volume which is how much air you're inhaling or exhaling. And that's going to often be
about 0.5 liter per breath. And so using the tidal volume and
multiplying it by the frequency of breathing, then we
can determine a minute ventilation, how much air are you bringing into
your respiratory system each minute. And so if you're breathing 0.5
a liter minute, 10x a minute, then that's gonna be
about 5 liters a minute. Keep in mind, and we'll be talking
about the sum that the depth, and the rate of breathing can change, and this
can dramatically increase airflow 20-fold. And then blood flow can increase 3-fold to
the respiratory system, so during heavy exercise we can make a huge adjustment
in basically the minute ventilation. However, if you're gonna do that, you're
gonna need to have active exhalation. You don't have time to let
everything slowly relax and let the recoil of the lungs happen. You're gonna need to have to be
able to squeeze out that air so that you can quickly
take another breath in. And so that will require
those abdominal muscles and the intercostal muscles between the ribs. So let's finish this up by just reviewing
what we've talked about where we're gonna have this huge interface for
gas exchange with the lung. And we've talked about how it's
gonna contain a conducting zone, which is what we're gonna call dead space. Because it can't exchange gas. And then it's gonna have an alveolar
space, which is the respiratory zone. And we'll be talking more about that. We've talked about some
of the basics of how we use negative pressure breathing
to get air into the lung. And then how we exhale. And then,
how we're going to have passive exhalation if we're at rest, but
then during exercise, that we're gonna need active exhalation. And that one reason why we can have
passive exhalation is because the lungs want to recoil, and so that's going
to help drive that process, and we'll be talking more about
that in future sessions.