Welcome back. We're going to consider this time,
some pulmonary function tests. So we're gonna look back again at some
of the volumes that are flowing in and out of the lung and how this can change
with diseases and then we're gonna start to consider more about the actual
composition of the air in the alveoli. Cuz in the next session, we're gonna
start talking about oxygen transport and talking about the pressure of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the alveoli
versus the capillary and so we're gonna start moving in that
direction during this session. So pulmonary function tests. So these are again, gonna be used
in helping to diagnose patients with obstructive versus
restrictive lung diseases and also monitoring their disease progression. And so one thing that can be measured is
the vital capacity or more specifically, the forced vital capacity, which is really
what we've talked about before where you're going to completely fill the lung
and then see how much air you can get out. So that you get down to the only
thing that's left is residual volume, then there's another thing
that can be measured, which is how much you can
expire in one second? So completely fill your lung and then see
how quickly you can get the air out and how much of it gets out in a second? So if you take the ratio of these two
numbers, how much can you get out in a second versus how much you can get
out over an unlimited period of time? That should for a normal person be 80%. You should be able to get 80% of
the air out of your lung in one second, of the air that you are going to
be able to get out of your lung. This is gonna exclude residual volume. So in our two types of disease states,
then these numbers are going to change. And this should be somewhat
predictable that someone with an obstructive lung disease,
they have a problem getting their air out, then this ratio is going
to be less than 80%. They're gonna get less than 80% of their
air out of their lung in one second. Their vital capacity, their forced
vital capacity is gonna be normal. They have a normal lung capacity. In a restrictive lung disease where
they have a problem getting the air in, they have no problem getting it out. So their FEV1 to FVC
ratio should be normal, they should be able to get 80% of
their error out in one second. However, it's the actual numbers for
those two capacities that should be different, because
their vital capacity is smaller and then that means the actual number,
the volume for their FEV1 will also be smaller even
though their ratio should be normal. And we're gonna see that
in this next slide, where Y is going to be this pulmonary
function test for a normal person. Where here at the beginning, you can
see they're taking a normal breath. It's about a half a liter. So they're breathing in,
breathing out normally. And then they're told, okay,
inhale as much as you can and that's where they are right here. And then they're told, okay, breathe out. Push out that air as fast as you can and
all of your air. And so that's when they exhale, do that
force expiratory volume for one second. And you can see here after one second,
they've gotten 80% of their forced vital capacity exhaled and
they have just a little bit left. So their forced vital
capacity is of course, normal and the FEV1 is normal. Now, we can consider someone with
an obstructive lung disease. Let's say, like emphysema, which is
this X curve where here in this example, they're breathing with their
lung being more inflated, which is probably going to be a good
compensation to help them exhale. So they take a normal breath and
then they're told. Fill up your lung and then their told,
okay, exhale as quickly as you can and that's when their pushing and
pushing at the air. But you can see after one second,
they've all only gotten a small portion of their
forced vital capacity out and it takes many, many seconds for
them to get to that 80% point. So that's gonna be typical of
an obstructive lung disease. In a restrictive lung
disease is at curve Z, then you can see that when
they do their inhaling, it's a much smaller volume
that they're able to bring in. So for instance,
they may have scoliosis and they just cannot expand their chest
wall anymore to let in any more air. But then when it's time for
them to exhale, it's no problem. They can get the air the out and so they're still gonna get the vast
majority of their air out, but you can see that their forced vital
capacity is about two liters here and their FFVC should be at about 80% of that. And so if you look at the actual
volumes that are being measured, they're much smaller even though the ratio
of the two numbers is still 80%. So we're gonna really switch gears now and start to consider what is the composition
of the air in the alveoli. This is an important thing to keep in
mind is that when we're breathing, we are not completely replacing
the air in our lung not even close. So that's what this is supposed to
point out, we're gonna have our conducting volume and our respiratory
volume about 150 mLs versus 3 liters. And let's say, here we have a total
volume of 450 mLs, pretty typical. We're gonna bring that into
the respiratory system and the last 150 mLs, however is
gonna fill the conducting volume, which means that only 300 mLs
of that 450 is actually reaching the respiratory potion that can
actually exchange with the blood. So by taking in a normal breath, we have only replaced the about
10% of the air in our lung. So that's an important thing to keep in
mind that we're only replacing a small portion of our air when we're breathing
in, in a normal breathing like this and that a lot of what we're doing is
filling the conducting volume. That means that we have to
really consider how much that conducting volume is
which is also the same thing that we're gonna
refer to as dead space. So we already talked about
what minute ventilation is. That's going to be how much air
you're bringing into the respiratory system each minute. So we're gonna calculate using the tidal
volume multiplied by the respiratory rate. So we've got three
different scenarios here. All three have the same minute
ventilation multiplying the respiratory rate
times the tidal volume. However, we know now that we really
need to consider alveolar ventilation. That's what we care about is how much
fresh air is getting to the alveoli. So to calculate that,
we're going to take the tidal volume and subtract the volume of the dead space. Which in this case, we're gonna assume
is just the same as the conducting space volume of 150 mL and then we're going
to multiply it by the respiratory rate. And so if we do that for scenario one,
we're seeing this person is basically breathing 50 times a minute, but
only bringing in 100 milliliters. So, it's basically like they're panting. [SOUND] And so in that case,
they're only bringing in 100 mLs, they're not even filling their
conducting space or their dead space of this air is zero liters of this
air is getting into the alveoli. So the alveolar ventilation is zero. If we have someone that has really
a normal breathing pattern of 10 breaths a minute of 500 mLs, then their
alveolar ventilation 500 minus 150, which is 350 times 10 is
gonna be 3,500 milliliters. And then if we have someone that is
breathing only five times a minute, but taking deeper breaths,
then we'll subtract 150 from 1,000 and multiple by 5 and
til we have actually a greater alveolar ventilation if where taking
deeper less frequent breaths. So that we can have the same
minute ventilation, but yet have radically different
alveolar ventilation. So it's important to keep
that in mind that minute ventilation does not
necessarily mean all that much, that alveolar ventilation is
also very important to consider. So now that we know the volume of the air
that is getting into the lungs or getting into the respiratory portion of
the lungs, then what does that mean for the actual pressure of the different
gasses that are in there? So that's what we're gonna start
considering, where we know that most of the air we breathe is gonna be
nitrogen and only 21% oxygen and that in the air we breathe
carbon dioxide is very low. We also know that the total
pressure is gonna be made up of the sum of the partial
pressures of the gases. And that means that the pressure of oxygen
is going to be equal to the fraction of inspired air that's oxygen
times the atmospheric pressure. So since oxygen's 21%
of the atmosphere and the atmosphere pressure is 760, that means in the normal
air that we are breathing, the pressure of oxygen is
160 millimeters of mercury. Remember that I said
that one of the roles of the conducting system was
to moisturize air and so that means that we're adding
the vapor form of air. And so vapor form of water and so that is going to be
the vapor pressure of water is 47 millimeters of mercury. And so that has got to be
subtracted from 760 millimeters of the pressure of
atmospheric air to calculate now what the new pressure
of oxygen is going to be an inspired air 150
millimeters of mercury. So that's the number, the pressure of
oxygen in the air once it's entered into the respiratory system before
it's been diluted by the air that's already in there and
that's what we're gonna start considering. So this is what we've just calculated. We're gonna say that we know the pressure
of oxygen in the atmosphere is 160. Once it gets humidified, it's gonna
become 150 millimeters of mercury. We've already said, the pressure of
CO2 in the atmosphere is very low. Once we get to the alveoli
that we've got this P big A, the pressure of oxygen is going to be
much lower and that's going to be. Because remember,
we said that fresh air's gonna be diluted. We're not gonna completely
replace the air in the lungs. So, it's gonna get diluted by old air and the old air is having the oxygen taken
out of it continually by the blood. So that's why the pressure of oxygen
is gonna be lower in alveoli. For CO2,
we are going to have a different issue. Where CO2 is constantly being
diffusing into the lungs and so that means that the pressure
of CO2 in alveoli is gonna be much greater than the almost negligible
pressure of the air that's coming in. Then once we look at
the pressure of oxygen that's dissolved in the artery or
in the arterial blood, that's gonna be P little a or
not capitalized. So that's gonna be our symbol for
arterial blood is Pa. P little a. So that's something to keep in mind, because I'm going to be referring to
these abbreviations a fair amount. So you can see that the pressure
in the arteries is basically matching almost exactly
the pressure in the alveoli. And that's true for oxygen and
CO2, so we're getting basically complete equilibration between
the alveoli and the arteries. And so that means that
the pressure of gas in the alveoli is going to be what is gonna
determine the pressure of oxygen in the blood and
that's what is important. So then that arterial blood is
gonna be taken to the organs and the organs are going to take
the oxygen and dump CO2. And so you'll see that the pressure
in veins of oxygen has now gone down to 40 millimeters in mercury. So, a lot of it's been dumped and
that now our pressure of CO2 in the veins has increased from 40
to 46 milliliters of mercury and we'll be talking much more
about these pressures and about how these gases are carried
in the blood in future sessions. So we've talked about Ventilation,
we've talked about minute ventilation, but now we've also considered
alveolar ventilation. How much fresh air is getting to
the alveoli, cuz that's what matters. We've also talked about how
that means you're gonna have to consider dead space where we've
got anatomical dead space, which is the only kind of dead
space we've considered so far, which is just the conducting
zone of the respiratory tract. Later, we'll consider a little bit
areas of the lungs that are not well ventilated or perfused, which is also
gonna be included when we talk about physiologic dead space and that's
gonna occur in just even normal lungs where we don't have perfect ventilation or
perfusion in different areas.