Hello. 
We're going to start now with skeletal muscle. 
So we've been talking about how skeletal muscle's controlled with the somatic 
nervous system. Now we're going to talk about how 
contraction actually happens. So in this session we're going to talk 
about The three muscle types found in the body and just some general principles of 
those and then we'll move in to talking about skeletal muscles specifically with 
the structure and then how the contraction occurs and then in a second 
session we're going to talk about. Tension that's formed by skeletal muscle 
and then some aspects of skeletal muscle metabolism. 
So let's start off with the three muscle types that are found in the body. 
First, striated skeletal muscle, which is shown in this Left most panel where we 
have large fibers that have multiple nuclei and they're stripped when you look 
at them in the microscope, so that's why they're called striated. 
And that's due to the alignment of the actin and Miocene filaments that are in 
skeletal More muscle. And of course skeletal muscle is 
controlled by the Somatic Nervous System. Cardiac muscle, which Dr. 
Jacoil talk about in a couple of sessions from now. 
Is also striated, so it also has that really tight alignment of, of filaments 
that cause the striping or the banding of the muscle fibers. 
They're not as large as skeletal muscle fibers, and they have one to two nuclei. 
They also have specialized junctions between the ends of the cells that allow 
the heart to contract as a unit and skel-, strided cardiac muscle is going to 
be controlled by the autonomic or at least influenced by the autonomic nervous 
system. Then, we have smooth muscle, which Dr. 
Jacquoi is also going to talk about, which are going to be sm-, much smaller 
cells that are have only a single nucleus and they're actin and myacin are not as 
highly organized and so, those cells are not striped, they do not have the 
stripes. And that also is going to be regulated by 
the Autonomic Nervous System. So there are some, common principles that 
are shared between all three of these types. 
So one is, as I've kind of already mentioned, we're going to have myosin and 
actin and they're going to slide along one another. 
To cause contraction of the muscle cell. These interactions with myosin and actin 
are going to be regulated by calcium and we'll see how that happens in skeletal 
muscle. And then, it's always going to be a 
change in the membrane potential, which is going to lead to contraction and so, 
this is called excitation. Contraction coupling and we'll see how 
that happens in skeletal muscle as well. So let's move to talking about skeletal 
muscle, where when we consider a single cell of skeletal muscle that's the same 
thing as a fiber. In a muscle like your bicep you're going 
to have the muscle with tendons on the end that are going to allow the muscle to 
connect to bone. And so in a muscle like the bicep, the 
attachment down at it's going to cross the joint, which is going to allow a 
short contraction of the muscle to make a big difference in, cause a huge movement 
in the lower part of the limb, because the muscle is attached down across the 
joint. Attaching to the lower arm. 
So this is going to be a labor action that is going to be quite dramatic with a 
relatively small shortening of the muscle. 
Each muscle fiber or cell is going to run the entire length of the muscle, so these 
are going to be very long cells, and, as we've mentioned, they've got more than 
one nucleus. Inside each fiber is filled with 
myofibrils, which is shown right here and right here. 
And then each myofibril is going to be filled with actin and myacin filaments. 
So the myacin is often called the thick filament. 
And it's going to be sitting in between two sets of actin. 
So it's going to be interdigitated between the actin, which is called the 
thin filament. So you can see the functional unit of 
these myofibrils are going to be called sarcomeres. 
And one sarcomere is going to be. Run from 1 z line to the next z line. 
With actin heading towards the middle of the sacromere. 
And myosin interdigitated between. The force generating unit. 
The factor that's going to control how much force that a muscle can produce is 
the number of myofibrils. Which is going to, if you have more 
myofibrils, you're going to have more actin and myosin in that muscle cell. 
So how does contraction occur? That's going to occur through the sliding 
filament model. Where, here we have 1 of our sarcomeres. 
And when we look at that muscle cell in the microscope and we said we had 
banding, the dark band is going to be the A band. 
So you can remember dark has an a in it. And that's going to be anywhere there is 
myacin. Myacin is going to stain darkly. 
So, anywhere there's myosin is going to be the A band. 
The I band, which is going to be, in the microscope, the light band, which again, 
light has an I in it, so you can remember it that way. 
That's going to be where there's only actin. 
So as contraction is happening, myasin is going to walk in towards up the agtin 
towards each of the Z lines. Which is going to shorten the I band. 
So that's what's shown in this, this lower part. 
The A band is not going to change in length. 
Because that's just the length of myosin. So the filaments are not changing in 
length. The, it's just the amount of 
inter-digitation between the actin and myoscin that's changing. 
So during contraction it's going to be the I band that's going to get shorter, 
as the Myosin my walks towards the Z line at both ends and makes the I band 
shorter. We're going to move to talking about the 
regulation of this process, and we talked about already how it's going to be 
regulated by Calcium, and in skeletal muscle, it's going to be regulated on the 
actin. So, here we've got our myacin and when 
there's low Calcium Triponen, this'molecule, Triponen, and Tropomyacin 
are going to be in such a confirmation that the Myacin bonding sites on Actin 
are blocked. However, when we have an increase in 
Calcium, Calcium is going to bind to Troponin, cause a conformational change 
that's going to then cause Tropomyosin to move out of the way, and allow access. 
To, the myacin bonding sites on atgin. So that's how calcium is going to control 
access of myacin to atgin. The other thing that we're going to need 
in order to get contraction of muscle is ATP, an energy source. 
And so that is, the ATP is going to allow the myosin to ratchet along the actin to 
bind it and then move. The myosin closer to the z line. 
So let's look at this cycle where if we start here, when we have ATP bound to the 
myosin head it won't be attached to the [UNKNOWN]. 
However that hydrolysis of that ATP is going to change the. 
Angle of the myosin head and energize it and then it will bind to the actin as 
long as we've got enough calcium around. Once the ADP form is bound to actin, then 
the ADP and inorganic phosphate can leave and that's when the crossbridge is going 
to move, it's going to ratchet. Which is then going to move the mysoin 
closer to the z-line. You see how this has now moved the myosin 
closer to the z-line, and that's what allows for that contraction, and for the 
z-lines to get closer together and for the sarcomere to shorten. 
If there's no ATP then this the mice and heads are going to remain bound to the 
Actin and that's what's going to cause, for instance rigamortis, the stiffening 
of people's muscles right after they die, because there's No more ATP around and so 
that myosin cannot be released from the actin and that's going to stay that way 
until the proteins start to degrade enough that the muscles will become less 
stiff. So this, we've seen now how, why we need 
calcium and ATP in order to get contraction Of muscle. 
Now, let's see how, we know that the excitation of that motor neuron is going 
to send an action potential down it's axon. 
How is that going to lead to contraction? So, we know that then, acetylcholine's 
going to be released from The end of the axon in the motor neuron and that, that's 
going to buy nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, which are going to be ligand 
gated, acetylcholine gated sodium channels. 
Which are sitting very close to voltage gated sodium channel. 
So as soon as we get a firing at that synapse, we're going to have an action 
potential. And that action potential is going to 
spread over the whole plasma membrane of that muscle cell. 
As well as through these extensions of the plasma membrane called transverse 
tubules, or t tubules. Transverse, because they're at a 90 
degree angle to the plasma membrane. These are invaginations of the plasma 
membrane that allow that action potential to. 
Travel down the t tubule, and to invade into that muscle cell. 
Because, remember, we said these are cells that have a large diameter. 
Also, next to these t tubules is going to be the sarcoplasmic reticulum. 
Which is a muscle specific form of the endoplasmic reticulum, that's going to be 
filled with calcium. So this little inset here shows how, why 
we need an close apposition of the t-tubule membrane and the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum membrane. In the t-tubule we have the 
dihydropyridine receptor. That is physically touching the ryanodine 
receptor which is in the sr. This allows the action potential that's 
going to change the confirmation of the dihydropyridine receptor. 
To then open the Rianaden receptor, which lets Calcium out of the SR and into the 
Cytosal. So, that's going to increase the Cytosal 
Calcium levels, which is then going to allow myacin to have access to act. 
The other thing that is going to happen however, is that once calcium starts 
increasing in the cytosol. Now a calcium ATP ace is going to be, to 
start pumping. Calcium back into the SR. 
And so as soon as calcium starts increasing, that pump is going to start 
acting to decrease calcium levels so that we'll get some contraction, but then 
we'll also get some relaxation once those calcium levels decrease, and myacin can 
no longer bind actin. Here's just another view of this system 
to give you more of an idea of what's going on in the muscle fiber. 
So, this is a single muscle cell that's shown in this diagram and we've got these 
grey T tubules coming in from the plasma membrane that carry the action potential 
into the core of the fiber. And then you'll see how it's going to be 
flanked by this blue sarcoplasmic reticulum so that we can have this 
dihydropyridine receptor next to the ryanodine receptor and get calcium out 
into the fiber and then you can see how the SR is surrounding each of these 
myofibrils so that each of these myofibrils is just going to be bathed in 
calcium. Each time an action potential runs across 
the plasma membrane. So we've talked about how in all muscle 
we're going to have this myosin and actin interaction that's going to allow for a 
contraction and how that's going to be regulated by calcium and it's going to 
require ATP. And then we talked about 
excitation-contraction coupling and how that's going to be important and that the 
calcium is going to be able to affect the actin that then allows the myosin to bind 
and that then, that calcium will be quickly removed to allow for relaxation.