Welcome back. We're going to shift from talking about
the nervous system in general to talking about the senses. So talking about the afferent pathways
that are bringing information into the central nervous system. And so we're gonna be applying a lot
of the principles that we learned when we were talking about
the nervous system in general. In this session, we're gonna be talking
about the senses in general for a few minutes and
then we're gonna focus on vision. So we're gonna start off talking about
general principals about the senses. And we're also gonna spend a little time
talking about somatosensation, which, if you remember, is really going
to be the senses of the body. So these are gonna be coming from
receptors that are in our skin, in our joints, in our muscle,
and other connective tissue. And we're going to sense pain, touch, certain vibrations, pressures,
as well as temperature. And this will also allow us to
be able to use proprioception, which is where we can determine
where our body is in space. And we can do that through some
of these stretch, for instance, receptors in the muscles or
receptors in connective tissue and joints. And this will also involve vision,
as well, in determining where we are in space,
but we don't have to rely on vision. And then we're going to be focusing
the vast majority of our time when we talk about the senses,
talking about what we call special senses. Special because they have
a special organ that is dedicated to the detection
of the stimulus. And so the receptors and the special
senses are confined to a specific organ, and they're gonna be found in the head. So those inputs are gonna be
fed into cranial nerves in contrast to most of our somatosensation,
which happens over the rest of the body. And then also don't forget, however,
that also in the process of sensing, our body is sensing things like
the oxygen content of our blood, the pH of our blood, and
as well as the osmolarity of our blood. And so these are referred
to as visceral stimuli, but our body is going to integrate this
signals and respond to those signals in a very similar manner that it responds
to other types of sensory information. Let's talk about some
general principles about the sensory portion of the nervous
system where we are going to have sensory information that
is going to reach the brain, and that's going to be sensation. That is going to be able to
tell us what the stimulus is, where it's happening on the body,
and how strong it is. Keep in mind that the language of the nervous system is going
to be the action potentials. And so it's going to be action
potential frequency that is going to tell us how strong the stimulus is. So if the stimulus is stronger, they'll
be more frequent action potentials. Another important element is
the idea that sensory neurons are going to respond to
primarily one type of stimulus. And this is gonna be important again since
our only language is action potentials. In order for the central nervous system
to interpret the firing of a neuron, it has to know what the stimulus
is that it's responding to. So if we have a heat sensing
neuron that's firing frequently, since that's the main stimulus that that
neuron responds to, then the central nervous system knows, well then there's
something hot on that part of the body. But if that neuron responded to two or
three stimuli equally, the central nervous system would have no way of interpreting
that action potential frequency and knowing what it actually meant. And so that's gonna be another common
theme that we're gonna be talking about, just that these neurons are gonna be
specific for a specific type of stimulus. Then, another process in sensing is going
to be converting that into the perception. What does this sensation, how do we
interpret it, and what does it mean. And then a third principle that
we're not gonna focus on much, but keep in mind that it's going to also
be a characteristic of these systems, is that very often they
can undergo adaptation, which is when they have
a decrease in sensitivity where they'll have a decreased action potential
frequency with the same stimulus. Some systems are gonna do
this more than others. This also gets into the idea of
our ability to focus our attention on the sensory information
that we find important. And so we actually filter out
the vast majority of the sensory information that we collect. And you can think about that right now,
if you're sitting and watching this video, you're able to focus on it even though
you have many other visual clues, you might also have other
noises that could distract you. You're sitting in a chair so
your touch receptors are being activated from sitting in the chair,
or from your clothes. But you're able to adapt or
to filter out that information so that you're able to focus on what's the
most important information at that time. Let's talk a little bit now about
the circuitry that's gonna be involved. So we know that these are going
to be afferent pathways and we're going to have, this would be
an afferent sensory neuron in red where, let's say, it's gonna be pain
neuron that senses pain stimuli. It is going to have a unique
morphology compared to the neurons that we've already talked about. So sensory neurons are going to be sitting
in these structures called ganglia, that are right outside of
the central nervous system. So it's gonna be a collection of cell
bodies outside of the central nervous system in the peripheral nervous system. So that's what's shown right here. It's call the dorsal root ganglion. So it's on the dorsal side
of the spinal cord and this neuron has a unique morphology. It's called a pseudounipolar neuron,
and you can think of it as being just one long axon with a cell
body sticking out of the side of it, where the beginning of the axon is
out here in the skin in this case. And if the stimulus is strong enough, it's gonna send action
potentials down the axon, as this arrow is showing,
it's gonna whiz by the cell body and then move down the other part
of the axon to enter the central nervous system as it's
entering the spinal cord here. So it's really like a single axon,
as we know that most neurons have, and it's going to carry information
from the periphery into the central nervous system where
it will synapse with Neurons that are going to be the ones that
are gonna integrate the information. And we'll see concrete examples of
this circuitry once we talk about the somatic nervous system. So then the central nervous system is
going to Integrate the information and then cause some sort of response which
will have the first neuron in the central nervous system, and then send out
the signal through the afferent pathways. So, keep in mind that we're
gonna have a stimulus. It is going to start a graded potential. It's gonna initiate a greater potential that if it's strong enough
will cause action potentials. So, the great potential you can
think of it as a receptor potential, and as we've seen in
the nervous system lectures, if it's strong enough it will
initiate an action potential. And again a single neuron,
sensory neuron, is going to respond primarily to a single type of
stimulus, which is gonna be important for interpreting the action
potentials from those neurons. Let's just briefly talk
about somatosensation again, where it's going to include senses
like the sense of touch and be able to sense pressure. This is going to be detected by afferent neurons that have
mechanoreceptors in their endings. And it's the morphology of those endings
and where they're located in the skin or in other things like in muscle that
can sense stretch, things like that. The morphology is going to determine
what specific stimuli they respond to. So for instance, there are free
nerve endings that are really just the bare end of an axon
with mechano receptors. They're often pretty close
to the surface of the skin. They're gonna respond to
specific types of touch compared to mechanoreceptor neurons that have
a big capsule with layers of cells and fluid around that nerve ending that
also contains mechanoreceptors. So because of that encapsulated
nerve ending and the characteristics of the tissues surrounding it, that's
gonna determine what it responds to. It might be a vibration of
a certain frequency, for example. That those encapsulated nerve
endings are gonna respond to, and then also based on where they are,
for instance. How deep they are in the skin,
they'll also determine what kind of stimulus they will respond to. So keep in mind we're not gonna go into
the details that we've got many different types of this touch and pressure neurons that have different morphologies and
different locations that let us detect the whole range of textures and
touches that we can sense. We're also gonna have the system for
proprioception where this is where the stretch receptors and
the muscle and in tendons, and joints. So again,
they're gonna be mechanoreceptors that are gonna be channels that
are gonna be gated by stretch or deformation of the membrane, that are
gonna be very important in proprioception. And as well as the visual system, being able to see where your
body is in space as well. Not only feeling where it is in space. And then your vestibular system, which we will also be talking about,
the organs in your inner ear that give you your sense of balance that will
also be important for proprioception. We're gonna have neurons that can
detect different temperatures, so we'll have different
types of thermoreceptors. Some that are going to be
activated at warm temperatures, some at hot temperatures,
some at cold temperatures. And the reason why they respond
to different temperatures, is because they express different
types of thermoreceptor molecules that are going to be ion channels that
are activated at a certain temperature. The interesting thing about these thermo
receptors is that often they also respond to chemicals or to different molecules. So one example would be
cold thermo receptors, cold sensing thermo receptors
that also bind menthol. Menthol can also open them and
menthol makes, for instance if you put on your skin feel cold
and that's because it's acting in the same way that cold does to open
cold sensitive ion channels. The same thing similarly happens for capsaicin which is what
makes chili peppers hot. So capsaicin is going to bind to
heat sensitive thermoreceptors. And that's why when you eat a red
chili pepper or hot chili pepper it's a sensation that's almost
indistinguishable from thermal heat. Because its acting on the same Protein
molecule and causing the same response. And that's also true for ethanol which
can cause a burning sensation as well. Then pain is going to be
sensed using nociceptors, which are going to most often respond to
chemicals that are going to be released by damaged cells or by immune cells that
are responding to damaged cells. And in that way we can know that
there's been some sort of wound or tissue damage, and
that we should feel pain. We're gonna now move into the first of the
special senses that we're gonna consider, vision. And obviously when we're looking
at something we are using the visual system to determine
the shape and color of objects. And we'll be able to detect
their movement as well, and what we're detecting are gonna
be photons of light. And that they're gonna have different
wavelengths and energies, and that is going to be what we detect
when we're detecting color, and we'll talk about how this happens. We can think of our eye as
being very similar to a camera. Where we're going to be focussing light in
the back of the eye on to the retina and that we are going to have
a lens to help us do that and a pupil which is like the aperture
that determines how much light enters. And that it's going to involve three
main steps, which is going to be that we are going to detect light that
is reflected from objects. And then that light that's being
reflected is gonna be focused by the lens onto the retina. And then the retina will contain
photoreceptors, that will convert the signal of the light
to an electrical signal. And then that will be processed
by the central nervous system. So let's look at how the eye is built, where the light is first
going to hit the cornea, the outer covering, main layer
of the outer portion of the eye. And most of the focusing is actually
going to occur at the cornea, because. The light is going from
traveling through air to traveling through a tissue
which contains a lot of water. And so that is going to cause a refraction
or a bending of the light that is going to accomplish most of
the focusing that occurs in the eye. So that is a major role of the cornea. Then, after then the light
travels through the pupil. Behind the pupil is going to be the lens, which is also going to
help focus the light. It's gonna be more of a fine tuning
that is going to allow us to focus on things that are near
versus those that are far. And we'll see how the lens is going to
change shape in order to accomplish that. And then it's going to be the retina,
once we focus light onto the back of it, that's gonna contain the photoreceptor
cells, rods and cones. So let's look at how
the lens changes shape. That's what's represented here in blue,
is the lens. And under kind of basal conditions,
it is surrounded by muscle. These muscles are gonna
run circumferentially, as you can see in this diagram,
around the lens. And they're gonna be attached to
the lens through zonular fibers, which are gonna be little ligaments, little pieces of connective tissue
that attach the lens to the muscle. If these ciliary muscles,
these muscles surrounding the lens, contract, that means that they
are gonna get shorter, which means that the diameter of the ring that
they're forming is going to be smaller. So it's gonna move in this direction. That is going to release some of
the pulling from the zonular fibers and allow the lens to become more spherical. Less flat and more more spherical. So when it's contracted, there's
less tension on the zonular fibers. The lens wants to be round, and
so that makes it more round. And that allows us to focus on
an object that's near to us. In contrast, when the muscle relaxes, then that means that the muscle
cells are gonna get longer. Which means that the ring that
they're forming gets bigger. And that's actually going to pull
more on the zonular fibers and produce more tension. So it gets confusing because we're talking
about muscle cells that relax, and then that produces more
tension in those ligaments. And that's just because those
cells are now longer and so our diameter of the circle formed by
the ciliary muscles is now bigger. And so now we have more tension, and that makes the lens that wants to
be spherical become more flat. And that allows us to
focus on distant objects. Once light comes through the lens and
then is focused on the back of the retina,
it's going to come in contact, or hit, the photoreceptor cells that
are sitting in the back of the retina. And then it's going to undergo the process
of phototransduction, the process of converting the energy that was in
that photon to an electrical signal. And so that's gonna happen through
some sort of photopigment, which is what's shown here in orange. It's gonna be a membrane bound protein, it's gonna be a g protein coupled
receptor more specifically. And it's also going to be bound to
a small molecule called Retinal, which is what's shown in here, which is a form of vitamin A,
or is based from vitamin A. And Retinal is going to
change its confirmation when it is struck by a photon. So that's what's shown here
in this first Step 1, where when the Retinal in the photopigment
is exposed to light, it's going to change its confirmation. That's gonna cause a change in
confirmation of the photopigment protein, which is a g protein coupled receptor. So that's gonna start a signal
transduction cascade. I'm not worried that you
remember the details, so you don't need to worry about the details
of these signal transduction steps. But what you do need to know is
that that change in conformation of the photopigment protein is going
to cause a decrease in cyclic GMP. Which then causes a cyclic
GMP-gated cation channel to close. So this is almost anti-intuitive, where when light hits it,
you're closing an ion channel. So that means that at rest,
when there isn't much light around, that this cation channel is open,
which is letting cations enter the cell, which means that at rest,
the photoreceptor cell is depolarized. Again, anti-intuitive that at
rest the cell is depolarized. So that means that when you
close that channel, that now the membrane potential is
gonna become hyperpolarized. So we have a graded potential, but
it's a hyperpolarization of the cell and that reduces neurotransmitter secretion. So it's very anti-intuitive that you
reduce neurotransmitter secretion from these photoreceptor cells when they're
exposed to light, but that's how it works. [LAUGH] It works so,
there are other neurons involved. So that's what this image shows,
actually, at the back of the retina, the very back,
is where you have the photoreceptor cells. So, in this case, we have six rods. And then there are other cells
called bipolar cells and a ganglion cell that
are also present there. So we have layers of neurons at the back
of the retina, and interestingly, the light has to travel through
those other layers of neurons, as shown right here,
to get to the photoreceptor cells. But again, it works. The photoreceptor cells,
and the bipolar cells, are going to generate graded potentials
that, if they're strong enough, will then cause the ganglion cells
to generate an action potential. So, that's something
that's a little different. We've got many layers of
neurons that are eventually going to lead to an action potential. The other thing that's important about
this diagram is to see that in this case, we have rods. And in this case six rods that
are feeding into one ganglion cell. And so this is going to allow for
a low resolution aspect of the vision because we
are summing six different rod cells and
converting it into one signal. So that's going to
determine the resolution. And in this case, it's gonna be a low
resolution because were taking six rods and they're feeding
into one ganglion cell. That's gonna be in contrast to cones,
our color sensing photoreceptor cells, where it's usually going to
be a ratio of one to one. So each cone is Only one cone is giving
signals to only one ganglion cell and so that's gonna be a high
resolution system. Versus this system which is low
resolution, but somewhat highly sensitive, because if a photon hits
either of these six rods, it can send a signal to the ganglion cell. And so we're gonna see that in this next figure where we're looking at
different levels of light, and which photoreceptor cells are going to
tend to be active in those conditions. So when we are at very low light, for instance the amount of light
when you have just stars out. Then we are not gonna have color vision because at this point we are only
going to be activating rods. They're going to be very sensitive but they are gonna be that low
resolution sight because of that convergence onto a six rods,
for instance, onto one ganglion cell. So rods are gonna be used for
night vision. They're not responsible for
color vision so we can't see colors when
we're at very low light. But and it's gonna be low resolution but
fairly high sensitivity because they can sense light even
though its very dark in starlight. Once we're hitting moonlight, then at
least we're above the threshold for cones. So at that point,
these cones can send some of that light. However, color vision is still not
going to be very good moonlight. It's once we get closer to Indoor lighting where now we're starting to have enough
light that we're getting good color vision because we're activating
the cones more efficiently. And we're going to be really
relying on the cones and remember we said because the cone
is gonna be in a one to one ratio with the bipolar and ganglion cells now
we're going to have high resolution vision when we get to this
higher amount of light. So how do we detect different colors? And if you think about it, it really is amazing how many
different colors we can discern. And if we had to have a cone for
each color that we could see. That would be an extremely
inefficient system. And so luckily we can see
all the colors that we see with only three different types of cones. So these are,
this is a graph showing the amount of activation of these different types of
cones based on the wavelength of light. So this is our curve for rhodopsin
that's not going to detect color, just detecting light and
usually at low levels of light. And then we have three different types
of color sensing cones, blue cones, green cones, and red cones. And so what the nervous
system does is it looks at the level of activation or
the amount of activation of each cone, and that amount of activation to each cone
corresponds with different colors. So for instance if we look at yellow,
right here. Then yellow is when
the red cone is basically maximally activated, and
the green is about half activated. That's what our central
nervous system is going to interpret as being that
the object is yellow. Versus when we're over
here in the blue range and basically we're only relying
on our blue cones and how much their activated to determine
the different shades of blue. Or we can look here in the green
range where the green cones are maximally activated but then the red
cone is also fairly highly activated and that corresponds to this green color. So in this way, with just these
three different cone types, we can detect an amazing number
of colors based on this system. And this is gonna be very similar in
the nose with our sense of smell, where we only have a few hundred types
of receptors that can bind odorants. But yet, we can discern thousands,
ten thousand different odors. And it's gonna be through
a similar sort of process. So, we've talked about just sensory
receptors in general, where they're going to detect a change in the
environment, which is gonna be a stimulus. And convert the energy from that
stimulus into greater potential, which will eventually lead
to an action potential. And that's gonna be a process
called transduction. We talked a little bit about somatosensory
pathways that are gonna be pain, temperature, touch, vibration,
as well as proprioception reception. And then we talk about how the visual
systems is gonna detect the shape and color of objects. And that we're gonna have rods and cones, that are then going to send signals
into the central nervous system.