Welcome back were going to finish
the senses with the chemical senses, so we're going to talk about
the last of the special senses. So we're going to be
dealing be chemoreceptors, molecules that are going to
bind certain chemicals and then eventually lead to a graded potential
which will lead to an action potential. So we'll be obviously talking about
taste and the sense of smell. But then keep in mind,
as we've mentioned before, there are gonna be other chemicals
that our body is also monitoring and responding to,
such as detecting osmolarity in the brain, which we'll talk about
when we talk about the kidney. And then talking about the amounts
of oxygen and CO2, and the pH of the blood, which we'll be talking about
when we get to the respiratory system. Let's consider taste first, where you're
going to have, along the surface and kind of in recesses of your tongue,
you're going to have taste buds, which are gonna be made up of taste cells,
which you can think of kind of like segments in an orange
that are forming this sphere around a central channel which
is called the taste pore. So you can see that because this
taste pore is kind of recessed from the surface of the oral cavity, and because it's gonna be really small,
that the substances, the molecules that we taste are going
to have to be dissolved in liquid. So that's fine because we pretty much
constantly have saliva in our mouth and certainly we have it when we're eating. But that does mean that in order to taste
something it needs to be dissolved so that it can enter this little
taste pore and expose the tops of these taste cells to the molecule. Then these taste cells will form graded
potentials, that if they're strong enough, will affect the afferent neurons
leading from the taste bud, to send action potentials into
the central nervous system. We can taste different flavors or
different taste modalities. We've already said how these substances
are gonna have to be dissolved in saliva and no matter what we're tasting, the result is that we're going to
increase intracellular calcium. That is going to cause a release of
neurotransmitters by these taste cells that are gonna cause graded potentials
that if they're great enough or strong enough will cause action
potentials in that postsynaptic neuron, that neuron that's leading
away from the taste bud. And we have a couple of major types of
channels that are gonna be activated. So when we're tasting something
that's sour, it's because we are detecting protons, we're detecting
something that's acidic, and then often when we're tasting something that's
salty what we're detecting is sodium. Also it can be potassium as well,
but in any case, these are going to be ions, and so
they're gonna act on ion channels that are then going to cause increase
in intercellular calcium in the cell. Versus sweet tasting substances,
which are going to be sugars, bitter, which are often compounds which
are often gonna be plant alkaloids. And then a fifth taste modality is umami,
which is a meaty flavor. So it's what makes meat taste like meat,
but also is what causes mushrooms to taste like meat, which is when we
are sensing amino acids like glutamates. So, sugars, bitter molecules, and amino acids like glutamate are going to be
detected by G protein-coupled receptors. So these tastants will bind the G
protein-coupled receptors, and then the G protein-coupled receptors will cause
a signal transduction pathway to initiate that will increase intercellular calcium
and cause the release of neurotransmitter. We're gonna finish up with smell, which
is going to be unique compared to most of the other systems that we've talked
about, especially of the special senses, because it is actually
the neurons themselves, the primary afferent neurons themselves,
that are going to be expressing olfactory receptors, and
actually binding to the odorants. So in the epithelium covering the nasal cavity is where we have these neurons
that are sending out cilia that have receptors on them that
can bind the odorants. And these are, again,
going to be G-protein coupled receptors. So each neuron will express
a specific type of G-protein coupled receptor that can bind
a certain type of molecule. We have several hundred
olfactory receptor types. So, we're gonna have
several hundred neuron types that are expressing
a certain receptor. But, yet,
we can discriminate about 10,000 odors. So when these odorants bind, they're
going cause a great potential which when great enough or big enough
can lead to an action potential. And it's going to be which neutrons are
activated and how much they are activated by binding a certain molecule that
lets us convert that to a smell. So if we have a certain molecule, let's
say that there are two or three different odorant neurons that can bind different
portions of that odorant molecule. And so, which neurons are activated and how much they're activated is what we
translate into smelling that molecule. And so again it's very similar
to our ability to see color, where we don't have
a different receptor type and a different neuron type for each color or
for each molecule we can smell. But instead it's the matter of
which neurons are activated and how much in combination
that allows us to detect so many colors and so many different odors. So we've talked about the two special
senses that involve chemoreception, taste, where we're gonna have taste receptors in
the tongue that are going to be associated with our five basic taste modalities,
umami, salt, sour, sweet and bitter. And again, when we're sensing a taste
it's going to be combinations of taste receptor activation that's
going to give us certain tastes. And we're gonna be interpreting those in
terms of perceiving what we are tasting. And then in smell we're going to be
activating olfactory receptors which themselves are going to be
the primary afferent neurons, leading in sending information
into the central nervous system.