Hello we're going to finish our
consideration of the nervous system by now considering an efferent pathway,
the somatic nervous system. So we talked about the afferent pathways
coming into the central nervous system and now we're gonna kind of combine the two
when we after we consider just the ether pathway the semantic nervous system
that activates skeletal muscle. Then in the next session we
are going to talk about reflexes, which is where we bring
in sensory information, the central nervous system integrates
that information, decides what to do, and then we're gonna consider
the efferent pathway through the somatic nervous system and how that controls
things like reflexes and locomotion. So in this session, we're gonna talk about general principles
of the Somatic Nervous System. Some aspects, spinal cord structure and just touch
again on the neuromuscular junction by the fair amount of this will be some
review from just the nervous in general. And then in the next session we're
gonna talk more about how the afferent pathways and efferent pathways
come together to control movement. So you've seen this figure before, just to place this in the context
of the larger nervous system, where we're gonna have sensory information
coming in through afferent pathways. That's what we've talked about. Most recently,
the CNS is gonna integrate and then we're gonna be talking about the
somatic nervous system which is the part of the efferent nervous system
that controls skeletal muscle. That's going to be in contrast
to the autonomic nervous system which is gonna be what
controls the organs. And this again is review to remind you
that with the autonomic nervous system, such as the sympathetic portion and
the parasympathetic portion, we have two neurons in series, where the first
neurons in the central nervous system. And the second one is
sitting out in the periphery. But with the somatic nervous system,
we have the single neuron sitting in
the central nervous system and sending it's axon all the way out
to the muscle to stimulate it. So, it's a single neuron system
in terms of the e-parent portion. And also keep in mind that the skill
of muscle is gonna perform a variety of actions, not just voluntary actions. So, it's gonna be involved in reflexes and breathing, which are gonna be
somewhat involuntary actions. Let's review our spinal cord structure
where we've already talked about how we're gonna have an afferent neuron coming in. It's cell body is sitting usually
in the dorsal root ganglion for the body sensory information. And then there will be neurons sitting
in the spinal cord called interneurons that are going to be part of
the system that is going to interpret the stimuli coming in. And we'll see in the next session
concrete examples of the circuitry. So we're gonna have interneurons
that are collecting information. And then based on what they decide,
we will have firing of the efferent neuron for the somatic
nervous system, that's gonna be sitting in the ventral what we call
the ventral horn of the spinal cord. So, this is the ventral
portion of the spinal cord and here we're going to have all of our motor,
somatic motor neurons with their cell bodies sending their axon all
the way out to the skeletal muscle. We need to now consider that somatic
motor neuron that we're just looking at in the spinal cord. What is it synapsing with? And so that comes to
the definition of a motor unit, where motor unit is a single motor neuron. And all of the muscle fibers, which is the same thing as a muscle cell,
that it controls. So that's what a motor unit is, and we'll be talking about this more when
we talk about skeletal muscle as well. Where a usually a neuron
is gonna control anywhere from 3 to around 1,000
different muscle cells, skeletal muscle cells or, which is
the same thing as skeletal muscle fibers. All of those fibers are gonna
be in the same muscle, but they're usually gonna be spread out. So that's what's shown
here in this muscle, where we're saying that these blue muscle
cells are the ones that are enervated and receiving signals from one neuron. This is this one motor
neuron's motor unit. Keep in mind that one, a single muscle cell is only going
to be intervated by one neuron. Which means that it is only being
controlled or regulated by one neuron, so our decision making about whether or
not a muscle cell should contract is coming at
the level of the somatic motor neuron. If it sends an action potential
down it's axon to the muscle the muscle is gonna contract and
we'll talk about that in just a minute and that muscle cell is only getting
inputs from that one neuron. So the muscle cell is not
having to decide whether or not it's gonna contract because it's
only being controlled by one neuron and whenever that neuron fires,
that muscle is going to contract. So the decision making is happening
with the somatic motor neuron not with the muscle cell receiving
multiple inputs from multiple neurons and deciding whether or not to contract. So let's talk about
the Neuromuscular Junction, which is just gonna be a certain type of
synapse which we've already talked about. There's nothing so unusual with it. We're gonna have the axon
from the somatic motor neuron coming to contact the plasma membrane
of the skeletal muscle cell. So the action potential will travel
down that axon and when it does, just like in a normal snaps,
it's going to open voltage-gated calcium channels that will let
calcium into the terminus of the axon. Which is gonna be the signal to cause
vesicles of the neurotransmitter, and more specifically,
acetylcholine, to fuse and to be released into the synaptic cliff,
cleft. So acetylcholine is gonna be what's
released by all somatic motor neurons. The muscle motor end plate, which is just
the portion of the muscle plasma membrane that is at the synapse, is gonna contain
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. So these are nicotinic synapses. And we know that nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors are going to be acetylcholine
dated sodium channels. So that means that if this neuron fires,
it's going to open sodium channels. That's going to cause a greater potential. However, keep in mind that
right next to this synapse on the skeletal muscle plasma membrane
we're going to have voltage, gated ion channels. Which is going to be somewhat unique
compared to what we saw with neurons. So that means that basically
we are having a synapse to what would be equivalent to
the axon initial segment. And so that means whenever we have
firing of the somatic motor neuron, for all intents and purposes we're also going
to have an action potential that occurs in the skeletal muscle membrane as well. And we'll be talking more about
that once we cover muscle. But again,
it's this idea that if that neuron fires, we're gonna have an action
potential in the muscle membrane. And that's gonna cause contraction just
because we're having a graded potential right next to voltage gated channels. And so it's a pretty much given that
one's going to follow the other. So, we've just had an introduction
to the somatic nervous system, where we're gonna control many
different types of movement. One, because for instance, the diaphragm that controls our
breathing is skeletal muscle. So things like that, as well as obviously
the muscles that are important for posture, and locomotion and these somatic
nervous motor neurons are going to act, they're sitting in the spinal cord and
they're going to act on skeletal muscle. A motor unit is going to be
a somatic motor neuron and the fibers that it innervates or controls. And we're gonna have these motor
neurons in the grey matter of the ventral horn of the spinal cord. And then we mentioned just briefly,
but we'll talk more about it. About this, interneurons in
the spinal cord and how they are gonna be important in coordinating
responses and integrating information. And this is a subject that we're
gonna really focus on in the next section in terms of talking about
how we make reflexive movements.