Welcome back. We're going to finish
talking about the somatic nervous system when we talk
about the control of movement. And I think one aspect that's
interesting about this is how much of it is really focused in the spinal
cord versus in the brain. And that will become
evident in a few minutes. First we're going to talk about the fact
that there are actually two types of lower motor neurons, meaning the motor neurons
that are innervating the skeletal muscle. There are alpha motor neurons. These are the ones that
we're used to discussing. These are the ones that are innervating
what we call the extrafusal muscle fibers or cells. These are the fibers of the main part of
the muscle, and these are the ones that are doing the contracting to cause
the muscle to produce tension. So these are the main muscle cells, and the alpha motor neurons are the ones
controlling those muscle cells. So this is what's doing
the work of a muscle, are the alpha motor neurons activating
the extra fusal muscle fibers. In muscles we also have another
structure called the muscle spindle. Which is consists of what
are called intrafusal fibers. That's what are shown here,
which are special muscle cells that shorten, but they don't
really generate force of the muscle. Another component of this muscle spindle
which is contained in this capsule right here is our afferent
neurons that are going to, since the stretch of these intrafusal
fibers and so it's going to be gamma motor neurons that are going to
innervate these intrafusal fibers. So you might ask,
okay if these intrafusal fibers aren't contributing to the force producing
capacity or the ability of the muscle. Why do we have them? And, so the point of this muscle
spindle is to have this parallel system of intrafusal fibers, and
these parallel system of the alpha and gamma fibers so
that whenever the alpha fibers of the alpha motor neurons are being
stimulated to cause muscle to contract, the gamma motor neurons
will also be stimulated. So that as a result when ever
the extrafusal fibers shorten the intrafusal fibers should
shorten in the same manner. And so in this way the muscle spindle is
like this parallel system that is special because of this afferent neuron
sensing the stretch in the fiber. And so it's this parallel system that
let's the body monitor the length of the muscle by monitoring the length
of the intrafusal fibers which are activated in the same manner, and
at the same time as the extrafusal fibers. And so
this is going to be one of our aspects of muscle length that is
going to be monitored for proprioception is the amount of stretch. And so this muscle spindle
is gonna be critical for monitoring the length of
the muscle as it shortens so that. The more it's stretched,
the more firing there will be of this neuron, and then as we contract,
the firing will reduce less and less. And that will tell the central nervous
system that the muscle is getting shorter. And because there's less stretch so
there'd be fewer action potentials and then that will tell the body about where,
for instance, the position of the hand
is based on how short the muscle is. So these alpha and gamma motor
neurons are going to be efferent somatic motor neurons and
they're gonna be co activated so that this muscle spindle will reflect what's
happening in the rest of the muscle. We're gonna switch gears just a little
bit to now talk about muscle sensory receptors. And you've probably guessed we're
already talked about one of them, and that's gonna be the muscle spindle. So it's going to be an important
sensory receptor for muscle is going to be the muscle spindle. You can see how that afferent neuron
that we were just talking about, it's coiling around the muscle,
and it's gonna sense stretch. You can remember it because spindle
starts with an s and so does stretch. And that means that when your muscle is
stretched that's when the neuron is firing the most and then as the muscle shortens
it's gonna be firing less and less. When it's firing a lot because
there is a lot of stretch. It can cause a reflex that is going to
cause contraction of the stretched muscle. So this is gonna be
a negative feedback loop. Which means that if we're saying
the problem is that this muscle is over stretched, then to correct that problem
it's gonna want to cause contraction. For instance, let's say of the bicep. Now, to do that, it's also going to need
to worry about what's happening with the tricep because if you want to
shorten this muscle, the bicep, then you're also going to
need to relax the tricep. And so the circuitry, and we'll see
the specific circuitry in a minute, is going to cause what we
call reciprocal innervation which means we're gonna cause
contraction of the stretched muscle, and then we need to cause the opposite action,
relaxation, in the antagonistic muscle. So that would be the biceps
versus the triceps. So in this way that gamma motor
neuron is going to activate the intrafusal fibers to
cause them to shorten. Alongside the extrafusal fibers and the muscle spindle which is the sensory
portion, are gonna act in this negative feedback loop so that we can keep
the muscle length at a desired value. And we'll see how that
happens more in a minute. Our other muscle sensory receptor is going
to be called the golgi tendon organ, which is going to be located in the tendon
that's attaching the muscle to the bone. And so this is going to respond
to a different type of stimulus. We said the muscle's spindle is going to
be activated when you stretch the muscle. When you stretch a muscle,
the Golgi tendon organ or the tendon itself is not going
to be stretched that much, because when you stretch a muscle
the muscle is gonna give so that there's not that much
tension put on the tendon. So if the Golgi tendon organ
fires very infrequently, just when the muscle's at rest,
when it's stretched, when the muscle is maximally stressed, the Golgi tendon
organ might fire a little bit more. But when it really fires and remember these are gonna be
mecanorreceptors in these, this afferent neuron that's gonna
respond to tension in the the tendon. When that golgi tendon organ is really
going to fire is when your maximally contracting your muscle, because that's when that tendon
is pulling against the load. It's kinda caught between
the contracting muscle and the load. And that's when the golgi tendon
organ is going to just fire, like action potentials like crazy. So that's why we say the Golgi tendon
organ is responding to tension in the muscle, not stretch, and
I always remember it because tendon, of the Golgi tendon organ,
starts with a T, just like tension. So, the Golgi tendon organ is sensing
tension generated by the muscle, which is basically going to
be when it's contracting. It's going to be an afferent nerve ending
located at the junction of the muscle and the tendon. And then,
we're going to have an afferent axon. So it's going to be
a mechanorecepter stretch-activated ion channels in this Golgi tendon organ. So that means that since golgi tendon
organ is activated by contraction, then they're going to act
to negatively feedback to regulate tension, so that if
the Golgi tendon organ is really firing, because you're lifting
a really heavy load, it's going to act to reduce contraction,
to relax the contracting muscle. And then again, it's going to have
to act with reciprocal innervation to then cause contraction
of the antagonistic muscle. So, it's going to act to fix the problem,
to use negative feedback, but it's going to act to relax
the muscle that's contracting. And we'll see a more concrete
example of this in a moment. So, let's talk about reflexes. Where we're going to have
some sort of sensory input, then the central nervous system is going
to decide what to do about that input. And then it's going to cause
a response that's going to be controlled by an efferent pathway
like the somatic nervous system. We're going to talk about first,
the muscle stretch reflex, which is basically, an example of
this would be the knee jerk reflex, when the doctor might use a little
hammer as you're dangling your leg over the examining table. And when he does that, he is striking
the patella tendon under your kneecap, which is then tugging on the kneecap,
and then on the quadricep muscle. And it's basically causing the quadricep
muscle to stretch really quickly. And so, that's going to
activate the muscle spindle. And we know that when we
activate the muscle spindle, that's going to cause
contraction of the muscle and relaxation of the antagonistic muscle,
and that's what we're showing here. So, we've activated the spindle, that's going to cause contraction
of the quadricep muscle and relaxation of the hamstring muscle. And we're going to do that through
the action of an inhibitory interneuron that's sitting between
the muscle spindle neuron, afferent neuron, and
the neuron for the hamstring. So we have an inhibitory interneuron,
and it's going to release a neurotransmitter,
such as GABA, or glycine, very commonly,
in a synapse with the semantic neuron for the hamstring, and
those neuron transmitters often cause opening of chloride channels, which
is going to cause chloride to rush in to the somatic motor neuron
controlling the hamstring, and if chloride rushes in negative charges
rush in and those channel stay open. It's going to be much harder to cause
an action potential In that neuron and if you have a reduction in
action potential frequency, that's basically relaxation of a muscle. So again,
our language here is action potentials. So when you want a muscle
to contract more, you have a higher frequency
of action potentials. If you want it to relax, then you greatly
reduce the frequency of action potentials. So when we're talking about antagonistic
control, or reciprocal innervation, we're causing one neuron to fire more
rapidly to cause one muscle to contract, and then we're causing the other neuron
leading to the antagonistic muscle to fire less frequently,
which is going to cause relaxation. And so that's what's happening here
when we have this reflex where we've got activation to muscle spindle,
activation of the quadracep muscle, and then activation of the inhibitory
interneuron, which prevents firing of the neuron that is
leading to the hamstring. Now this, obviously the vast majority of
our movements are not completely reflex. One thing to note with this is, that this reflex that we're talking about
really involves only the spinal cord. These are the neurons, and this is
only about involving the spinal cord. However, we can use reflexes
like this by influencing them from up above,
from the brain to do more everyday tasks. So an example of using this muscle
stretch reflex would be if you're holding a glass for someone to pour a drink into. Your brain knows that if you're holding
this empty glass, and someone's about to pour a drink, you need to keep your
arm level, so that when they start to pour the drink you don't just dump it
because of the extra load from the drink. And so what the brain can do is say, okay,
this muscle is right where it needs to be. I don't want it to get any longer. I don't want it to stretch any more. And so, it changes the sensitivity
of the muscle spindle so that now, it's not only going to act just if it's
completely stretched in a dramatic way, it's going to act and
be super-sensitive, so that it's going to cause a reflex
if this muscle gets longer at all. And so what will happen is that you've got
this new amount of sensitivity set into the system from the brain, affecting
the same circuit we've just been talking about, and someone starts to pour a drink,
the load gets greater because this is heavier, so
your arm dips just a little bit. But that's when that muscle spindle
says no I don't want to stretch. And so it causes this same reflex that
we just saw with the knee jerk reflex, where it's going to cause contraction of
the biceps and relaxation of the triceps to keep this drink level, keep your arm
level so you don't spill the drink. So in this way,
the basic circuitry is the same as this completely reflexive action
of the knee jerk reflex, but we are able to modify That system,
by the brain, through the brain, and use it for
a more everyday purpose. So let's talk about the Golgi tendon
reflex, that's also gonna cause a reflex. Well we said, remember, the Golgi tendon's
gonna be really activated when the muscle is really contracted and really
pulling dramatically on that tendon. So that means we've got the signal
coming from the Golgi tendon organ, coming into the spinal cord. Its cell body's gonna be sitting
here in the dorsal root ganglion of the spinal cord. And it's going to act on
an excitatory inner neuron in the tricep, to then cause excitation of the somatic motor neuron leading to the
tricep to cause contraction of the tricep. And then it's gonna act to
activate an inhibitory neuron which will then inhibit the neuron leading
to the bicep to cause it to relax. So, it's again, trying to fix the problem
of too much tension in the muscle. And it's gonna do that by
relaxing this muscle and contracting the opposing muscle. So it's gonna act with
reciprocal innervation again and this is going to act to limit
the tension within the muscle so that we can protect the muscle and
the muscle tendon junction so that they don't damage or just rip apart. We can also have influence of a stimulus that is not in the muscle itself,
or not in the tendon itself. It could be, for instance, a pain stimulus
coming from the skin which can also cause a reflexive action that
involves the somatic motor system. And this is an example where it's
called the withdrawal reflex. Because in this case someone
has just stepped on a jack and as a result the reflex is
going to be to withdraw the foot. So that means that the quadricep
is gonna be relaxed and the hamstring is gonna be
contracted to do that withdrawal. Now if you withdrew your foot, and didn't make an adjustment in the opposing
foot, you would just fall right over. And so this withdrawal reflex not only
involves withdrawal of the limb but it also involves the crossed
extensor reflex, which causes the opposite
action in the opposite leg. Where instead of withdrawing the other
leg you extend it, which allows you to support all of your weight on
the foot that's not experiencing the pain. So this gets even more complicated,
because not only do we have reciprocal innervation in each leg, but
we also have opposite actions in each leg. And so
that's what this animation is showing. Where now we're activating
to withdraw this leg and to extend this leg through again, afferent
pathway this time from a pain receptor. And so we're getting reciprocal
innervation of each leg and causing opposite effect in
one leg versus the other, to withdraw one leg and
extend the other leg. And again, this sort of reflex can be modulated by the brain, so
if you pick up a hot plate, your reflex is going to be
to withdraw your hands. However, if that plate is
really precious china or it's got your favorite meal on it, you might be able to kinda tell yourself
okay I know it's hot but hold on. If it's too hot you might
not be able to do that. But you do have some control in some
instances over your reflexes and again it's just the brain influencing
these very circuits that we're looking at. That's gonna move us to talking a little
bit about central pattern generators, which are going to be
these spinal cord-centered circuits that are gonna be responsible for
a lot of our repetitive movements that happen in everyday life. So these are going to be neural
circuits that are gonna coordinate complex patterns of movement. And that it's gonna be independent
of sensory input to some extent, but that it can be adjusted in
response to some sensory feedback, and I'll give you an example. So because these are repetitive
movements that means that these circuits that are generated are going
to be oscillatory. And they are gonna be flexible
due to control by the brain. So let's talk about one
of the easiest things to see an example of this would be walking,
where you've got two different actions that you're gonna do,
two main actions that you're gonna do. One is that you're going to have
the swing phase when you walk, which is going to be whenever
your foot is off the ground. You're swinging it from being
behind you to in front of you. So that's the swing phase. Then the stance phase is when you've
just stepped on the foot, and then you're going to push
to move your body forward. That's called the stance phase. And so each leg is going to alternate
between being in the swing phase and the stance phase. And again, you're gonna have to
have reciprocal innervation of the different muscles to allow for,
basically, withdrawal and extension. But then when your right
leg is in the swing phase, your left leg will be in the stance phase. And so again,
like with the withdrawal reflex you're gonna have reciprocal
innervation of the limbs as well. So it's actually somewhat simple, or very repetitive motion where you're just repeating the same
sets of muscle contraction. But you need to make
sure that the left leg is doing the opposite of
the right leg at all times. And so this can be established and based in the spinal cord through
these central pattern generators, where they just generate this pattern of
neural activity that causes you to walk. This can be adjusted by the brain, and that's adjusted in response to sensory
feedback and influenced by the brain. And an example of that would be if you
want to go from walking to running. It's the same general pattern. It's just you're gonna reduce the stance
phase and that will allow you to run. So, it's just a little modulation of
the main central pattern generator that allows you to switch to running. And it's efficient because you get
to use the same basic circuits and just modify them to do a different
activity such as running versus walking. This has also been pretty well
studied in quadrupeds, so in animals that have four legs. When, for instance, a horse goes
from a trot to a walk to a gallop, they still have a similar
motion of basically a swing versus a stance
phase with their leg. But the pattern of which leg is in which
phase changes depending on how their gait. And so again it's a modification of one
of these central pattern generators that allows for
that different pattern of movement in different types of gaits
in a quadruped animal. So we've talked about our
sensory receptors in muscle that are going to regulate
muscle length and velocity of shortening and
tension in the muscle. And remember how we can use these in terms
of just being able to monitor what's going on with the muscle,
in terms of proprioception. But then also in using it as
a reflex to protect the muscle. Or to do everyday activities as well. And then, we do have some reflex
actions that are involved with any sort of sensory information. We talked about sensory information
coming from muscle, tendons, or skin and causing a movement
in an appropriate muscle. And then we talked about
central pattern generators and how they can be important in
everyday repetitive movement, such as walking, and how it's gonna involve having antagonistic
muscles being reciprocally innervated as well as reciprocal
innervation of certain limbs as well. So central pattern generators
will be involved in many everyday processes that
are repetitive in nature.