Welcome back. We're going to continue our
consideration of the special senses, talking about the hearing and vestibular
system that are gonna be found in the ear. We're gonna start off with the auditory
system that is gonna detect sounds and it's going to be detecting sound waves
which are gonna be compression and expansion of air molecules
in the forms of waves. So it's gonna be waves
that are expanded air. And compressed air that
are alternating to form waves. And it's going to be
the amplitude of the wave, the height of the wave that's gonna
determine volume of the sound. And then it's gonna be
frequency of the waves that is going to determine the frequency or
the pitch of the sound. And so that's how we interpret
these sound waves into the noises that we actually hear. So the auditory system is gonna
be able to detect complex sounds by breaking them into their
basic sound frequencies and then they're obviously gonna be
converted into action potentials. And, volume is going to be relayed by
the frequency of action potentials. So the louder a sound is, the more
frequent the action potentials are. And we'll talk about how pitch, or the frequency of the sound is
gonna be determined, as well. So now we've got to get involved
in the anatomy of the ear, that's obviously gonna be critically
important in to how we hear. Where the sounds are going to
be focused onto the tympanic membrane, or
the ear drum by the auditory canal and then we're gonna have a set
of three bones, the malleus, incus and stapes that are going
to transduce the vibrations of the tympanic membrane
to vibrations in the fluid of the cochlea which is
gonna be in the inner ear. So here's a zoomed-in
portion of the middle ear and the inner ear,
the middle ear being where we have the three bones that are going
to rock next to one another when the tympanic membrane
vibrates from the sounds, that's gonna cause them, malleus,
incus and stapes to rock and cause the vibrations at
the oval window of the cochlea. So this is zoomed-in
picture of the cochlea. Where we're gonna have two
different fluid paths and we'll see about this in
the next figure as well. But here's the oval window where
we have it being vibrated from the tympanic membrane,
transduced by the bones and then causing the oval
window to be vibrated. And I forgot to mention,
but these bones are so important for amplifying the vibrations. So that's what their crucial role is. Because out here in the outer
ear we have vibrations of air, but
then we need to cause vibrations in fluid. Which is gonna be much less efficient and
require much more energy to cause the same amount of vibration of a fluid
compared to vibration of the air. And so, that's the role of these three
bones, is to amplify the vibrations from the air, so that it can cause significant
vibrations in the fluid of the cochlea. So that's what's gonna happen when
this oval window is vibrated. It's gonna be strong enough to
transduce the vibrations from the sound waves in air to vibrations in a fluid. And the fluid vibrations
are going to first enter this top compartment, the scala vestibuli. And then,
those are gonna travel down the cochlea. And so if you unrolled it,
it would just be a single tube. So the vibrations will go
down the scala vestibuli, and then come back around towards
the second fluid pathway, which is in the compartment
called the scala tympani. And we'll see how that vibration coming
through the scala tympani is what's gonna cause the vibration that's gonna
activate the basilar membrane to vibrate. So you can see here
are the two fluid compartments. And sitting between it is what's
called the organ of corti. And that's what we're going
to see in this next diagram. So here we have a zoomed-in
view of the organ of corti where at the top we have
the scala vestibuli. And remember that is the fluid
that's right behind the oval window. So when the oval window gets vibrated, then that will cause ripples of fluid
to travel down the scala vestibuli. Those will travel all the way down
the cochlea, make a u-turn, and come back the scala tympani, and right above the scala tympani
is the basilar membrane, and that, on top of that sits
hair cells that have these hairs that are embedded in
the tectorial membrane. So the tectorial membrane is gonna be
stationary, and you've got hairs that are embedded in it sitting on the basilar
membrane, which is going to vibrate. And so, as that happens, that is going
to move these hairs on the hair cells. And bending of those hairs is
gonna cause depolarization or hyperpolarization, depending
on which direction. And so, based on which portion
of the basilar membrane along the length of the cochlea
that's vibrating the most, that's gonna determine the frequency or
the pitch of the sound. So once the hair cell is going to
be activated then that's gonna activate an afferent neuron which are
going to join to form the cochlear nerve, which is going to then send it to
the rest of the brain for processing. And as I just said, the region of
the basilar membrane that's gonna vibrate the most is gonna correlate with
the frequency of the sound. And then the louder the sound,
the greater the vibration and the greater frequency
of action potentials. So it gets into the idea again that
the brain is gonna know that signals coming from this particular
neuron that feeds from a specific portion of the basilar membrane
means that there's a certain frequency of sound and
then the frequency of action potentials to tell the brain the loudness
of that frequency of sound. We're gonna move to the vestibular system,
which is going to be able to detect different types of motions of the head or
the body. They're gonna be in the inner ear. They're gonna be able to detect
angular acceleration, so changes in the angle of your head,
as well as linear acceleration, changes in the horizontal or
vertical plane as well. And we're gonna have two different organs. One are gonna be the semi-circular canals, which are gonna respond to
changes in head rotation. And otolith organs, which are going to
be able to detect the tilt of the head, as well as vertical or
horizontal movement, with there being two different otolith
organs, the saccule and the utricle. So again, let's understand the anatomy,
where again this is gonna be in the inner ear adjacent to the cochlea,
where we are gonna have three semi circular canals which are gonna
be tubes with fluid in them. And it's convenient that there's three and
they're at 90 degree angles from one another,
which allows us to detect changes in the angle of the head along
the three perpendicular axes. So one of the canals is going to be
highly stimulated when we nod yes, versus one when we shake no, versus
a third when we tip our head side to side. And if you're doing some sort
of combination of those, then there'll be multiple of
the two canals that are activated. Also on this diagram it shows
the otolith organs, the utricle and the saccule that are these
little compartments kind of between the semicircular
canals and the cochlea. So we said, the semicircular canals
are gonna be these tubes that are full of fluid, and then sitting in
the loop is gonna be the cupula, which is going to be these hair cells that
have extensions that are in the fluid. And so as our head rotates, then the canal or
the tube is also going to rotate, but the fluid is actually going to
stay relatively stationary. And so, it's the movement of the tube or
the canal with those hair cells, and the stationary aspect of the fluid
that is going to cause tugging or pulling on these hair cells and
causing the action potential eventually to signal that
we're having movement in that direction. This is my demonstration of
a semi-circular canal where if you tilt your head, the canal that's attached
to the heb is also going to tilt but the fluid which is in the canal
will primarily remain stationary. And in this way with the fluid
remaining stationary and the canal tilting that's
what signals to that apparatus attached to the hair cells, and
lets you know that your head is tilted. Let's move to the otolith organs which
are gonna again involve hair cells. So this is a common theme, or the idea
of cells with extensions like hairs. And these are going to, as we've said,
detect changes in linear acceleration or in the position of the head,
as in, if it's tilted. And at the ends of these tips of
these hair, there's gonna be gel. They're gonna be sitting in this layer of
gel and then on top of that are gonna be otoliths, which are gonna be
calcium carbonate crystals that are in this gel that is found
at the tips of the stereocilia. And since they're calcium carbonate,
they're very heavy. And so that means that a change
in the position of the utricle or saccule is gonna cause those calcium
carbonate crystals, the otoliths, to be pulled by gravity and then to
pull on the tips of the stereocillia, which will be the signal that there's
been movement or change in position. So the utricle based on its
orientation in the body is going to detect movement
in the horizontal plane. While the saccule because it's at 90
degrees is going to detect vertical movement, so movement going up and down. This is animation showing you
the movement of the head or the body and
the response by the otolith organs. So here you see the hair cells
with their stereocilia sticking up into this blue here shown
as blue gel with these green otoliths that calcium carbonate
crystals that are going to pull on those stereocilia and
elicit a response. So here when we tilt the head backwards. Then you can see that, because gravity
is gonna act on those otoliths, since they're so heavy. That is gonna cause them to
pull on those stereocilia. Whereas, when we tilt forward. Then the otoliths are gonna
be pointed in the other direction pulling on the stereocilia. And then when we have forward acceleration
what's happening is that those otoliths, since they're so heavy and dense, they have greater inertia
than the rest of the body. And so it's like they stay in place while
the rest of the body goes forward and that's what causes the tugging. So it's actually very similar to what
happens when you tilt your head backwards. And then when you decelerate,
it's gonna be the opposite. The otoliths are gonna
kind of stay in place, while the rest of
the body moves backwards. So I'll let you watch it again. We're tilting and acceleration or deceleration are gonna cause very
similar changes in the otoliths. Or forward acceleration similar
to tilting your head backwards. And deceleration is gonna be similar, causing a similar effect as
tilting your head forwards. So, finishing this section up,
we talked about the auditory system. How we are gonna be able
to detect complex sounds by breaking them into their
basic sound frequencies, and then, being able to determine the volume
of each of those basic frequencies. And this is going to be obviously
converted into action potentials and then sent to the brain for interpretation. And then the vestibular system is
going to aide us in maintaining our balance, in part by knowing
where our body is in space. And we're gonna be able to detect
position and motion of the head. And they're gonna be
found with these sensory, hair-like cells that are gonna be
found in the semi-circular canals, as well as in the otolith organs,
the utricle and the saccule.