Welcome back.
So today's going to be our third
lecture in this course. And we wanna talk about
the division between the cell and its extracellular environment. As I said in the very first lecture,
every cell has a membrane around it, and that membrane forms a hydrophobic barrier. And that prevents ions or
any charged molecules from moving from the extracellular space
into the interior of the cell. So that exit and entrance of
these hydrophilic molecules, or these charged molecules,
is gonna be regulated by the cell. And so, today, we wanna talk about
the kinds of proteins that are used to regulate the exit and entrance of
hydrophilic materials from ourselves. So the learning objectives then are one, we're going to describe how solutes
are moving across the cell membranes. Two, we want to explain how charge,
size, and their solubility will affect the solute
movement across the membranes. Three, we wanna contrast how the
transporters, pumps, and channels work. So, these are the proteins that are going
to mediate the movement of hydrophilic materials, that is charged materials,
across the membrane. And lastly, we wanna describe
how the ion channels are gated. That is the regulation of
movement across these channels. So the first thing is that you
have to remember that the cells have a hydrophobic barrier, and
this barrier is a bi-layer of lipid. So, this lipid then,
this bi-layer of lipid, allows hydrophobic materials to come
across, but not the charged entities. But our physiology, the process,
the physiological processes are controlled by a lot of signals that are coming
from the extracellular space. And it has to come into the cells or they have to change the property
of the cell in some manner. And the kinds of physiological processes
that are controlled are one, growth, two, are metabolic processes. We have to be able to move fuel
across the membranes, for instance. So glucose has to be
able to enter into cells. And then thirdly, we're going to use some
of this movement across membranes to signal information from the environment
back into the body to the integration center, which is our brain, and
then back out to the effectors. So, in order to be able to
govern the nervous system, we have to be able to
convert chemical information, which is coming in from the environment,
into an ion, and this ion then travels. The ion flow is going to then take
the information to the brain, where it can recognize the information,
and then send out, also by ion flow, to the effectors to
something like glands or to the muscle. The other reason that we're
interested in this topic is that this is really the basis of many diseases. When we have defective transporters
such as in cystic fibrosis, then materials are not positioned
correctly across the membrane. For instance in cystic fibrosis, the chloride is not moving
across the membrane correctly. And because the chloride ion
is not moving correctly, water is not moving correctly
across these membranes. Consequently, the mucus, which is secreted
by the lung as a protective barrier, becomes very, very thick and viscous. There's a difficulty then for transporting
gases across this mucus layer so that the oxygen then
can get into the blood. The other one is that we can
have defective channels, and we'll talk about what
channels are in a minute. But, in these cases, then,
the channels can be allowing calcium, or sodium, or potassium to be
moving across the membranes. In the long QT syndrome of the heart, we find that some of these
channels are defective. And that, then, changes the way
the heart is able to have its beat. And because the beat is prolonged, then what happens is that
the heart can go into arrhythmia. The other thing that we should notice is
that these channels, and the pumps, and the transporters often are the target
sites for our drug therapies. So for instance,
when you have hypertension, somebody has a blood pressure that's very
high, they maybe treated with a diuretics. The diuretic inhibits the ability
of a sodium transporter to move sodium across membranes. Therefore, water cannot follow sodium. What happens then is that the sodium and
water are peed out from the body. So, we increase the amount of
urine production from the body. By doing so,
you decrease the volume of the ECF, and by decreasing volume of the ECF,
you decrease blood pressure. We also have drugs that can be
be used to treat stomach ulcers. So in stomach ulcers, you have an erosion of the epithelial
cells that line the stomach. And under these conditions,
the acid is the causative agent. By blocking the ability to make acid in
the stomach, then the ulcer can heal. So, these are called
Proton Pump Inhibitors. And when we talk about the stomach and
its activity, the physiological role of the stomach and its ability to make acid in the GI tract,
that is the gastrointestinal tract, then we'll be talking about
these proton pump inhibitors. All right, so let's look at the very simplest way of
moving materials across a plasma membrane. And that's what is diagrammed here. So, if you can imagine that we have
a plasma membrane which is here, and that this plasma membrane, then again,
is going to be our bi-layer of lipids, our hydrophobic barrier,
and we have the ICF, which is the yellow component, and
outside of that we have our ECF. So we have this orange material
which is sitting in the ECF, and the membrane is able to allow this
material to cross the membrane. So this material is permeable to
the membrane, so the material then can enter into the ICF, and it will enter by
going down as concentration gradient. So it has high concentration of
the orange material in the ECF. And so the dominant movement of
the material is toward the interior of the cell because the cell has very
low concentrations of material. This is by what's called diffusion. And that this is simply
a random movement of particles going across
this permeable membrane. Because the plasma membrane is
a bi-layer of lipids, any molecule that is soluble in hydrophobic materials,
that is soluble in lipids, such as urea, can easily pass
across the plasma membrane. So, the orange material can be urea. So as the urea then enters into the cell, we also have a very small flow of
the urea back towards the ECF. But this is a very small flow because
we have a very high concentration of the urea in the ECF and
a very low concentration in the ICF. The flux, which is gonna be the random
movement of this material across the surface per unit time,
is gonna be determined by the gradient. So the net flux is determined by
the gradient, and we go from a high concentration to a low concentration,
and this is called Simple Diffusion. Now simple diffusion can also
occur between two cells. For instance in the cardiac myocyte, we have a small junction which is
called a gap junction or a nexus. And this structure is a little pore that's
between the two cells, two adjacent cells. If we have a high concentration of
calcium in the first cardiac myocyte, this calcium can diffuse through
the gap junction to the second cell. Which is shown here, and again, the diffusion is down
the concentration gradient. So, the gap junctions, then,
are allowing the diffusion of ions, and notably calcium,
from one cell to the other cell. And this occurs through all
the cardiac myocytes of the heart that are contractile, so these cells
are all connected to one another so that, when they contract, they have
a wave of calcium that goes across cross all the cells and
they all contract synchronously. So the characteristics, then, of the
simple diffusion, is that a molecule is going to move from a high to low
concentration, that it requires no energy expenditure, and third that it will
continue until the equilibrium is reached. That is, we will have an equal
concentration of materials on either side of the membrane. Fourth, it occurs rapidly
over short distances but very very slowly over long distances. So we can move materials from the
vasculature across the interstitial space, which is pretty narrow, and
into the cells by diffusion. But it would take way too much
time to move materials from the GI tract all the way to the lung,
or to the brain, by diffusion. So we have to have the cardiovascular
system, which has a pump, and moves material by bulk flow. Five, the simple diffusion is directly
related to temperature, so if I increase temperature, the system will go faster, if
I decrease temperature, the system slows. And six, it's inversely related
to the size of the molecule. So if the molecule is very large,
then it's gonna be very slow diffusion for that molecule. If the molecule is very small like an ion, say a sodium ion, then the diffusion
path can be quite rapid. Seven, the diffusion will be dependent on
the total surface area that's available. A large surface area you'll have
a lot of diffusion, a very small surface area has very little material
that can cross at that particular point. It's also dependant on the thickness
of the membrane that it's going across. This is going to be very important when
we talk about the respiratory tract. If the membrane between the air space and
the vasculature thickens because we have water in that
area or we have some kind of fibrosis, so we have connective tissue in that area,
the diffusion path for gases will be lengthened and then the diffusion of the
gas across that region will be impaired. And we'll talk about that some more when
we talk about the respiratory tract. So that's the simple diffusion, and
that works for hydrophobic molecules. But molecules that
are not soluble in lipid, that is molecules that are hydrophylic,
they are polar molecules, they are charged molecules, they cannot move across
the plasma membrane by simple diffusion. Instead, some of them are using what are called transporters, and transporters
are integral membrane proteins, so they're actually stuck into
the center of the membranes. So if we look at this membrane, we have
our bi-layer of lipids, and that's here. So this is our membrane. The bilayer of lipids
has a molecule that's actually embedded within the bilayers. When they're embedded in the bilayer,
they're called integral membrane proteins. This particular integral membrane protein
can be open to, in this case, the ECF, or the extra cellular fluid space. But it can change its conformation, and
then opens to the intracellular fluid space, and it does so by simply flipping
back and forth across the membrane. So, a particular example of this
would be the the glut transporter, that is the glucose transporter or
the gluts. This is a family of transporters
that can move glucose into cells, and all cells have glut transporters. The glucose can enter into our carrier, this transporter, and
as it enters into the transporter from the extracellular space,
then there's a conformational switch, and now the glucose is released
into the interior of the cell. This particular transporter can
move in both directions, and so the net flux, or the net flow of
the material across the membrane, is dependent upon
the concentration of the material. So if the material has a high
concentration in the ECF, then we will have a net movement
of the glucose into the cell, but the glucose that's within the cell can
also enter into the transporter and move back across the membrane. So it is a system which simply is active
depending upon the diffusion gradient. So, this is called facilitated
diffusion because we're using an integral membrane protein to
move the solute across the membrane. And there's a couple of things about the facilitated diffusion
that we should think about. One is, is that they're specific, these transporters are specific for
a given solute. So the glucose transporter
transports glucose, but it does not transport an amino acid,
or a peptide, or something like that. The second thing is, is that there's a finite number of these
on the membrane surface so that we can, under certain circumstances
saturate all of these transporters. And at that point, we can't get any
further transfer of material across the membrane, that is, our net flux
across the membrane becomes constant. And that's what we can see
here on this next diagram. So, here I've diagrammed the flux
versus the solute concentration. So, let's say this was our glucose,
the glucose in the ECF, and that the solute concentration is
increasing as we go in this direction. The Flux, of course, is our transport
rate across the membrane itself. And if we look at this simple diffusion,
the simple diffusion would be for urea, for instance. Then as we increase the urea
along the x-axis, so if we increase urea along here,
the solute concentration of urea, then the urea is moving in a linear
fashion, and that it never asymptotes. But if we look at the facilitated
diffusion for the glucose, then what we see is that glucose will
saturate all of the receptors, or all of their transporters at this point. So that at that point, any concentration
of glucose beyond that does not cause an increase in the transfer rate,
or in the flux across the membrane. Now some of these transporters are able
to take more than one solute at a time. For instance we can have a transporter
that will move glucose and sodium together, and these occur
within the gastrointestinal tract, they also occur within the renal tubules. This sodium glucose transporter
is a co-transporter, it's taking two solutes across
the membrane at the same time. And again, it will load on one side of the
membrane, undergo a conformational change, and then release the material on
the other side of the membrane. And here again,
is our hydrophobic bi-layer. If the molecules, the sodium and
the glucose in this case, are moving in the same direction, they're going from the ECF into the ICF,
then it is called a symporter. They're moving in the same direction. And importantly, this only works
if both the sodium is present and the glucose is present, so we have to
have both solutes present in order for this transporter to work. But we do have in some
instances the antiporters, and the antiporters are again, we could find
these in the gastrointestinal track, and within the renal system,
within the renal tubules. And here we are moving both a sodium,
in this case, a sodium and a proton, but they're moving in the opposite directions. So this transporter, as it's moving
a sodium into the cell is moving any proton out of the cell,
and into the ECF. And because they are going in the opposite
directions, this is called an antiporter. Again, there is specificity
with these transporters. They're only are binding
the specific solutes, and both solutes have to be present for
the transporters to work. And again, there is a finite number
of these on the cell surfaces. And therefore,
the transfer of the material from one side of the membrane to the other,
can be saturated. Now we do have instances, where there is actually a pore
made across the plasma membranes. So again, we have our hydrophobic barrier,
which is our bi-layer of lipid. And these are integral membrane proteins
which are inserted within the membrane. But when they are open, there is an aqueous pore that goes
all the way across the membrane. An example of one of
these is the aquaporine. Aquaporine is a pore which is used for
moving of water across the membrane. And in almost all cells
aquaporines are present, and so water will almost immediately reach
equilibrium across a plasma membrane. But under some circumstances,
we have channels where the pore is gated. That is it's closed, and
there's a regulated opening of the pore. And this regulated opening of
the pore is called gating. In both cases, when the pore is open, then the movement of the particle across
the channel will be by diffusion. And we will be moving from high
concentration to low concentration. So in the case of the aquaporine,
we could have water, which is higher in
concentration in the ECF. And the water then will move to the ICF,
at a very rapid rate. So, how then are these channels gated? The channels can be gated by
three different mechanisms. The first is a ligand gating. This simply is a chemical which will
bind to the channel itself, and the channel will be in a closed position. And when this ligand binds to the channel,
it will cause the channel to open. An example of this is
the acetylcholine receptor. This is a neurotransmitter for the
parasympathetic system, nervous system. This acetylcholine binds to a nicotinic
receptor, on the skeletal muscle. So this nicotinic receptor on
the skeletal muscle is a channel, it is a sodium channel. And when the acetylcholine binds to
the channel, the channel opens, and sodium can enter into the cells. It enters into the skeletal muscle. And we'll talk about what happens after
the sodium enters into the skeletal muscle, when we deal
with the skeletal muscle. This channel will only allow sodium to
cross, and the channel will only open when there is acetylcholine present, and
that can bind to the receptor itself. In the second type of channel,
these channels are opening to voltage, and we've not really talked about how
there is a charge difference, a charge gradient across
the plasma membranes. We said that there is a chemical
gradient across the plasma membrane, so that sodium is high on
the outside of the cell. And very small on the inside,
a small concentration on the inside. The potassium is very high on
the inside of the cells, and has a very small concentration
on the outside of the cells. So that's a chemical gradient across
the plasma membranes of all the cells. But there is in fact a voltage gradient, that is a charge gradient
across the membranes as well. And this charge gradient is due in part
to the negatively charged proteins, that are inside the cells. So the inside of the cell is
more negative, than the outside. So the ECF is more positive,
relative to the inside of the cell. When the voltage that is the charge
across this membrane changes, and it can change in certain cell types,
such as neurons or muscle. Then if it reaches a specific
difference in voltage across the membrane, it can open channels. And one of the channels that will open
is a voltage-gated calcium channel. The voltage-gated calcium channels
are present in cardiac muscle. And then at a certain change of
voltage across the membranes, these channels will open. And then at a certain voltage,
these channels will again close. And we'll talk about these some more, when we talk about the cardiovascular
system and the heart. And the last kinds of gating we see,
is mechanical gating. A mechanical gating is
found in the smooth muscle. So in the smooth muscle, we have
a situation were the smooth muscle has around the artery may have a tone, a tonic contraction,
which is a basal contractual state. If more blood is delivered to that vessel,
then the walls are stretched. And when the walls are stretched to open
these mechanically gated channels, and calcium can enter, and the calcium
causes the smooth muscles to contract. And the cells will then go back to
their original contracted state. So that the vessel diameter then,
will go back to its original basal state. And again, we'll talk about this more when
we talk about the cardiovascular system. So, those are our channels. So with the transporters and
the channels then, the movement of materials
across the membrane, once the opening is present, then
the movement is going to be by diffusion. But with pumps we are moving materials not
from a high to a low concentration, but in the opposite direction. And that's what's shown here. So with pumps we're going to have a high
concentration of material on one side of the membrane, and
let's say that is calcium in the ECF, so these little green dots are calcium. And in the space we have calcium, and
it's in a very small amount of calcium. Our pumps are enzymes, and they're enzymes
which will cleave, usually an ATP. So they cleave an ATP molecule, which
is an energy molecule within the cell. By cleaving an ATP, they will undergo
a different confirmation, and that allows the molecule to cross the
membrane, and that's what's shown here. So we bind ATP to an inactive pump,
the calcium ATPase, and we bind calcium to the calcium
ATPase on the inside of the cell. It undergoes a confirmational change, and when it does so, the calcium is
extruded to the extracellular space. So removing calcium then from a low
concentration, to a high concentration. Exactly the opposite of what we
saw with the simple diffusion and facilitative diffusion. And this requires energy. There are many really important pumps,
within the cells of the body. One of course, we've already talked
about is the sodium-potassium ATPase. This is a pump that maintains the volume
of all the cells, and it allows us to keep a steady state of sodium and
potassium across the plasma membrane. We also have the Calcium ATP-ases,
which I just talked about, and these are present in muscle cells. So we're going to move
calcium across membranes, moving calcium very quickly from the
inside of a cardiac myocyte for instance, in order to be able to relax the cell, and
to then be ready for the next contraction. We also use these pumps in other areas
such as the stomach where we make acid. So in order to make acid, you extrude
a proton into the lumen of the stomach, and you do so
by using a proton potassium ATPase, and we'll talk about that when we talk
about the stomach and the GI tract. So there's one last concept
that we need to talk about, and this is a little difficult for
students to understand sometimes. There are areas of the body
where we wanna move materials all the way across the cell, not just going into the cell, but
across the cell and into the bloodstream. And we're starting with the lumen,
such as the gastrointestinal tract. You just ate your Big Mac, and we now have glucose sitting in the lumen
of the gastrointestinal tract, and we wanna move it across the epithelium
into the blood on the other side, and then deliver that to the liver,
and to the cells of the body. And we do that not by
a primary active transport, which we just talked about, which is
just a simple pump moving it across, but we use two different entities, and the two
entities are working in coordination, so this is called a secondary
active transport. So the secondary active
transport requires a ATPase pump on one surface of the cell,
usually on the basal surface of the cell, that's the side that's
facing the bloodstream. And then on the lumen, or
the apical surface of the cell, we have a co-transporter, and
that's what's shown here. So, this happens to be the sodium
glucose co-transporter that we talked about already, and
in the gastrointestinal tract, it's known as the SGLT, or
the Salt Glucose Transporter. Both glucose and sodium will bind to
this transporter, it's a co-transporter, and it's sim porter, and so the sodium and
the glucose enter into the cells. And when they enter into the cells, the
glucose then is at the high concentration and it will diffuse across the cell and
leave the cell at the basal surface through a simple transporter which is
by facilitated transport for glucose. So this is just simply
a glucose transporter, so glucose then exits the cell,
and enters into the blood. Sodium on the other hand,
moves across the cell and then the sodium is pumped out of the cell
actively by the sodium potassium ATPase, which moves three sodiums out for
every two potassiums that enter. And this pump requires and ATP, so
it's an enzyme which cleaves ATP, so that the energy is moving the sodium then from
the interior of the cell, to the outside. And we know that that's moving the sodium
against its concentration gradient. The glucose, in a sense, gets a free ride. The glucose is using the sodium gradient,
and the sodium gradient is maintained by the sodium potassium ATPase,
which is on the opposite side of the cell. So we have a transporter,
a co-transporter, which is linked to a active
transport of one of the solutes. And that sets up the gradient where
the other solute then is able to just essentially piggy back or get a free
ride as it goes across the cells. And we'll talk about this trans-cellular
transport in much more detail when we talk about the gastrointestinal
tract in the renal tubules. Okay, so one of our general concepts. So, the first is is that the movement
of a solute across the lipid bilayer, the cell membranes, is dependents on its
size, its charge and its solubility. The second is that the net flux or movement of the solute will be
determined by its gradient. And third, that a permeable solute
crosses the membrane by simple diffusion. This is a slow type of a movement
across the membrane, and it is a more general type of movement. So that's soluble and
lipid can move across this. So this would be some of the steroid
hormones, it could be urea. These are molecules which are able to
cross the membranes without having a specific transporter, and they will always move down
their concentration gradient. And they will move down the concentration
gradient until they reach an equilibrium, so that you will have an equal
distribution of the materials on either side of the membrane. Fourth, we have non-permeable solutes, will cross the membrane
by facilitated diffusion. This is going to be fast,
it uses transporters. These are those integral
membrane proteins, and the process again requires a gradient,
it's saturable, and it's specific, and
that's because it's using a transporter. So this is a much more targeted
type of movement of materials across the membranes and into the cells. Five, primary active transport moves a
solute against its concentration gradient. This mechanism requires ATP, so we have to cleave ATP in order to be able
to move this material across the membrane. Again, it will show specificity, the
sodium potassium ATPase moves sodium and potassium in an anti manner, but that it will move protons out of
the cells if it's a proton ATPase. But if it's a proton ATPase,
it will not be moving sodium and potassium across the membrane. And again, these things will be saturable,
we'll have a finite number of these pumps that are gonna be on
the plasma membrane surfaces. And six, secondary active transport couples the
activity of a co-transporter with a pump. So, under this condition,
we will have the active extrusion of one of the solutes that's coming
in with that co-transporter. And this is the mechanism that's used for
transcellular transports of solutes across the gastrointestinal tract, epithelium,
and across the renal tubule epithelium. So, we're moving from a luminal surface all the way across the epithelium
to get into the blood space. Okay, so
the next time we come in here then, we're going to consider how we move
water across the plasma membranes. So see you then.